Title: Fluorescence mapping of microbes in polar ice: what we are learning about metabolism at low-temperature and the archaeology of storms

Prof. Paul Buford Price

Physics Department, UC Berkeley

November 5th, 2007

--

Transcribed on July 18th, 2018.

--

I've been puzzling in the last few days about why I even thought about going into the question of life in ice. It finally dawned on me that, though so much has happened in the last eight years, this proposal that I was hounded into developing was the result of my entry into the question of life in ice. Toward the end of the Center for Particle Astrophysics' existence, an NSF science and technology center, we learned that there would be a new competition. Several people got together and brainstormed for ideas for something new both for Berkeley and for an international cast of characters. This is what I finally ended up pushing. What is interesting about it is that the theme that binds everything together is doing something about ice -- either going down into ice with robots or bringing ice cores up or installing 3-D seismic arrays or mammoth neutrino detectors and what-not. I starred here several of the apparently totally different topics and I realized that the ones that are starred we're working on in my group without any funding from a science and technology center.

So, here are the two sites that we are working on. There are several interesting places. If you look at Greenland ice, my colleague Ryan Bay developed an optical dust-logging device that can go down rapidly, 3,000 meters down, measuring every millimeter a sample of whatever light is scattered back into the ice. It's usually dust, sometimes it's volcanic ash, and sometimes it's microbes. He's logged at these two sites and at this site. Coming up in about a year is a Danish collaboration that we hope to participate in. They would like us to not only log at a site which hopes to go back 200,000 years instead of only about 110,000, but to sit in trenches for four months at -30 degrees Celsius with a fluorescence device that I will tell you about to scan and keep up with every meter and a half of ice that is brought up by drillers. I think we can do it. If we get the money, we will. If you look at the southern extremes, we have the IceCube project. Ryan has logged three boreholes and done some interesting climatological and glaciological work, which is the topic of another talk. We've done a little bit of work with Vostok samples. We're approved by the Europeans to log this borehole, which goes back about a million years, which is a factor of ten older in time than these two regions. The WAIS Divide is the new NSF glaciological drill project. We have the first 250 meters of ice on that. The plan is to, for each of the next three or four years, to bring to the National Ice Core Laboratory (NICL) in Denver another 1,000 meters of cores, and we will work in that coalroom to study life with fluorescence devices and then we've logged there, too.

So now, the first topic is ideas on how ice can be lived in by microbes. Microbes are known to require water. They require bioelements to replace carbon, nitrogen, phosphorous, and so forth in their cells. They also need a source of energy in the form of molecules that can be brought together in redox reactions catalyzed by enzymes in their membranes. Here is my first idea, which was from 2000. It's been adopted, it's been tested, and it's correct as far as it goes. The idea is that ice is unusual when it crystallizes from water in that almost all positive and negative ions, instead of going into the lattice as impurities, are excluded into grain boundaries, where they form a eutectic (binary) compound, which lowers the freezing point. In the case of sulfuric acid, for example, H2O and sulfuric acid can lower the temperature in veins and remain liquid to -73 degrees Celsius. One can get even lower. One can find compounds on Mars that are not even acids, but are salts, that will get you down to about -50 degrees Celsius. So, I will tell you in a moment about the theory, which is found in chapter 11 of Kittel and Kroemer's book, "Thermal Physics". Nobody teaches chapter 11, because it is regarded as chemistry. It talks about binary systems, phase diagrams, and eutectics. You can see some limitations. First, I'll show you in a moment how one calculates the diameter of a vein. Clearly, a microbe this big is not going to be able to fit into one of those veins and will die. Most eukaryotes are out of luck, but most of the universe consists of bacteria and archaea. The top diagram here shows a laboratory experiment at Bristol where ordinary water was doped with fluorescent beads of various diameters. This shows what happens with micron-sized fluorescent beads, when you view it in a fluorescend microscope and you adjust the vein size to be slightly bigger than the size of the beads. All of the beads are captured into the veins. If they are a little too big, all of them are rejected. So, the behavior is critical. Here is the first natural experiment, which was done on Arctic ice. This woman, for her PhD thesis, imaged real cells trapped in veins in Arctic ice and in fluorescent light; she had doped them with a stain. You can see that dot there. Here are some small cells that people at Penn State have studied by melting ice, filtering it, staining it, observing it in SEM's. Two-tenths of a micron is close to the limit for life; anything much smaller than that seems unlikely to be able to be a self-perpetuating organism. So, we have a few tenths of a micron and all of these that they have found will fit into those veins.

Here's a chapter 11 calculation. If I tell you the temperature is thirty degrees below freezing point and tell you what the amount of sulfuric acid that's precipitated from the atmosphere into snow is, then I can calculate vein diameter in thermal equilibrium is about four microns. To get it still colder, the vein diameter has to be smaller and smaller. The strength of the acid has to be stronger in order to keep a little bit of the ice liquid.

Now, we started working at the very bottom of the Greenland ice sheet project two (GISP2) -- silty ice which was the result of glaciation (freezing a swamp) at the highest point in Greenland. What we found in looking at that ice is grains that are mostly clay minerals that are typically a micron or five microns in size. Cells were imaged by stain. If you get right up here, you can count seven little white dots. Here, there is a lot more. These comprise about ninety to ninety-five percent of all of the life at the bottom of 3,000 meters of ice. They love to attach themselves to clay mineral grains, because that's the source of energy. We'll go into that in a moment. What is surprising is John Priscu has looked at this new drill core that I was telling you about that's only 250 meters down in the West Antarctic and he's found that when he melts and filters and stains that, in fact, even with bacteria that are blown in from above, rather than found in the swampy region, those microbes that are transported in the end are often hitchhiking on the surfaces of either volcanic ash or desert dust or ocean debris. You can't count them and neither can I, because I am not all that great at making sharp images from PDF's, but there are about twelve or so there. Now, this is the theory of how you get an unfrozen layer and nutrients on clay grains. What we have is the fraction of unfrozen water at some temperature below freezing down to -40 degrees Celsius for a variety of mostly clay minerals and one basalt as a control. Typically, for clay grains, you get twenty to fifty percent unfrozen water in a thin layer between solid ice and the clay surface. Here is the theory -- the four different contributions.

That works not only for clay grain surfaces, but also for cells. The third is a surprising habitat and it was necessitated -- I'd been stewing over this problem for a year or more -- by the question of how does a microbe that is nowhere near a vein -- maybe there are no veins at a particular depth because the chemistry of the impurities is wrong -- and all we have is unlimited H2O molecules frozen as ice -- survive? Where does the water come from? Well, that is due to the theory I showed you a moment ago; it tells you that there is around a nanometer or one or two molecules' thicknesses unfrozen. Here, you have an anaerobe of the strictest kind -- meaning they cannot reproduce in the presence of air. So, they are very sensitive to oxygen. I'll show you the puzzles in a moment. One of the puzzles is: why do we find methanogens, meaning methane-producing microbes, in ice, when there is always air in the ice? What I've drawn here are different-colored circles, which are supposed to indicate dissolved molecules that were deposited in the snow and then packed down and trapped in the ice. Bobby, Willy, and I, in a paper that came out two weeks ago in PNAS, got interested in how one might find metabolism -- living cells -- in this bizarre environment with no grain boundaries or veins to extract water and nutrients from. If the diffusion coefficient for random jumping -- interstitial hopping -- within the ice is at least as large as about 10 ^ -15 meters per second, we can account for metabolism of even quite large cells that are much too large to fit in veins. So, that solves one problem. I'll list all of the problems that it solves in a moment. I'm showing here a cartoon where diffusion has brought one methane molecule and one oxygen molecule into this liquid layer and, by diffusing around it, they get together and the aerobe uses an enzyme to lower the activation barrier for the redox reaction. So, the aerobe is then able to make CO2. The methanogen needs four hydrogens and a CO2 and if they diffuse until they get together and react, one can get methane and water.

Here is my list of things that this third habitat explains. Big cells can survive. Microbes that do not like to be in five molar sulfuric acid can survive. Where veins do not exist, microbes can live. Aerobes and anaerobes can coexist because they are neither immersed in a reducing atmosphere or in an oxidizing atmosphere -- they are just immersed in ice. The oxygen that is necessary for the aerobes is diffusing to them. Occasionally, the oxygen will reach a methanogen. However, a methanogen can handle oxygen one molecule at a time by using an enzyme -- this one -- to correct for presence of oxygen at the membrane.

Here is the silty ice that I mentioned -- fourteen meters of it, loaded with enormous concentration of microbes, we find.

This accounts for the fact that whereas in the top 3,000 meters, you have hundreds of parts per billion of methane from the atmosphere -- one of the greenhouse gases -- and hundreds of parts per million (instead of tens of thousands of parts per million) of carbon dioxide, you have a growing amount with increasing depth. Our speculation was: let's look at the ice and see if it's possible that the CO2 and methane are the reaction products of microbial metabolism from either respiration (which aerobically makes CO2), iron reduction (which converts Fe3+ to Fe2+), or methanogenesis (which makes methane). Now, the iron reduction is going to take physics to explain and I believe it is a good example of an interdisciplinary approach.

This is the part of the talk that tells you how iron-reducing bacteria can eat. I will show you in the next slide what I mean by electron shuttling for iron reduction to take place. The observation that triggered our explanation for iron-reduction was done by an undergraduate student, Camas Tung, who measured the number of cells sitting on the top side of a grain as viewed by SEM. She would count, in this case three, and plot them as a function of grain diameter. You have to take one little jump from diameter to perimeter and then you can see the point. The real estate is divided up not according to area. The Fe3+, which is prominent in swampy smectite clay grains, is very early eaten up by microbes and the same is true with the bottom surface. But, they keep on eating. Somehow, they're able to get iron from the inside. That's the job of the electron shuttlers.

This is the way it works. Here, we have a side view of a smectite grain with typically ~100 layers. It's only a micron or two the other way. The light blue is the unfrozen water I need for liquid. I've shown an iron reducer which uses one of the oodles of organic molecules that came from a swamp that is swarming around in this unfrozen layer. We'll take phenol because it is a small one that has been measured in the laboratory to be able to do the shuttling. The equation is up here -- you have any organic, let's say formate, acetate, oxalate -- together with ferric iron and an intermediate of a phenol molecule which takes an electron from the iron an deposits it somewhere -- I'll show you where in a moment. This leads to energy released and hydrogen and CO2. Then, in fact, you can have a reaction where the methanogens use waste from iron reducers.

This goes back to Mott and the theory of polarons. Polarons are electrons that pull positive charge a little closer and repel negative charge a little bit away from them. They can account for the DC conductivity of insulators -- mica, in particular. Mica is highly asymmetric -- anisotropic -- like the smectite clay. Let's say the phenol molecule lets an electron go here (from above) -- it's difficult to tunnel (i.e. there is a big barrier) this way in a layered structure such as clay or mica. Instead, if it deposits an electron here (from side), what you get is formation of a polaron and hopping. Now, all of the iron throughout the whole three-dimensional structure serves as food. This accounts for why in laboratory one can use up all the iron -- convert all the iron in a clay into ferrous iron.

This is some of the work that Mott was aware of. One can measure DC conductivity for electric field parallel to basal plane, which is four orders of magnitude higher than for electric field perpendicular to basal plane. This shows the dependence on amount of iron -- if one has an iron-rich smectite, one gets a higher conductivity than if it does not have as much iron.

Now, we'll continue to keep in mind physics and chemistry, but switch from fourteen meters of silt to top 3,000 meters of transparent ice, which is constantly being added to with wind and storms transporting organic molecules, inorganic molecules, acids and what-not -- and microbes -- from deserts and oceans. I've got a change in scale from zero to 2,800 meters to 2,900 to 3,040 meters. Here's the silty layer at the bottom. Now, I want to draw your attention to measurements made by geochemists of methane. You can see that I have suppressed the scale so much that you cannot see that there are ups and downs by about a factor of two between glacial and interglacial stages, because I wanted to show you that at the bottom sixty meters or so, one has three anomalies that people have swept under the rug who are doing gas chemistry, because their interest in gas -- methane, nitrous oxide, and other gases -- is to understand how the climate is changing between glacial and interglacial periods. I suspected that this factor of ten excess at depths A and C might be microbially produced. The same student who did the perimeter study melted ice, filtered it, stained with a stain that enables her to count cells with a microscope. This data, from zero to 200,000 cells per milliliter, singled out ice at various depths -- A, B, C, and about eight or ten other random depths. I've labeled D and E, because they, surprisingly, also had high cell concentrations. The reason you don't see corresponding anomalies in the methane is that the sampling was only about every fifteen meters. So, they were unlucky and missed -- or lucky, if you were a climatologist and didn't want these things to worry about. We have all cells in these two panels. We have methanogens in these two. Since we're making methane, it should be no surprise that we have an enhancement at depths A, B, C. The trick to quickly counting methanogens is to use the fact that, uniquely among all bacteria and archaea, they have an enzyme in abundance -- it's called F420 -- it's a coenzyme that absorbs at 420 nm -- that's why it's called F420 -- and it emits at about 460 nm -- it fluoresces.

Here is what most of the rest of the talk is going to be using -- two systems that enable us not to put fluorescence meters down into deep boreholes, because boreholes are kept from refreezing by putting organic drilling fluid there and that fluoresces like crazy. We would only be able to use either dry or water-filled boreholes. Instead, we look at the ice at -26 degrees Celsius at the National Ice Core Laboratory in a clean-room. Here's the setup. Here's Bobby Rohde, a student who built this device, which works with a laser at as close as we could get to 420 nm -- it's at 404 nm. Here's a piece of ice that is sliced -- it's one meter long, it's horizontal, it's oriented to be level. Here's the laser and seven photon counters with different filters so that we can crudely map out a spectrum that tells us that we have one methanogen. Over here is a commercial device that uses a deep ultraviolet laser to look at tryptophan, one of the amino acids that brightly fluoresces and that is in all cells. This scanning system is for counting cells. The other system is for counting methanogens. Here is an example where we're looking at a microscope and taking a photograph.

We learned a great deal in a short period of time with those two instruments. We have to do ground truth. We have to calibrate what an intensity reading here corresponds to. This is the one that is calibrating for protein-bound tryptophan -- so this is total cells. The red points shown here correspond to spectra. There is no room for us to show thousands of individual spectra -- they're all crowded over here. The shapes fit nicely with the spectrum of tryptophan in E. Coli, but are not at all the right shape or magnitude for the spectrum of mineral grains like clay or like volcanic ash. The red points are for cells and blue points are for everything else, like mineral. A and A' are subdivisions of point A, here, at 2,954 meters, which I showed you, a few minutes ago, is loaded with methanogens and cells. Here's point B, again with subpopulation, and here's point C. What you'll find is that this is typical of every piece of ice that we look at -- it's distributed in some very heterogeneous way. Every centimeter is a new surprise. The cells are not cooperating in being deposited uniformly in time and space.

Let me finish the ground truth. We have West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) Divide from the southern hemisphere and GISP2 from the northern hemisphere. From the intensity here, you can calibrate with cell counts, and you will find an average mass cell -- 40 fg, of order a few tenths of a micron in diameter -- next to arrows. The arrows show typical cells. Then, you've got a lot of points with more intensity than the typical. You've got some that are a confirmation of hypothesis of habitat one, which is that cells like to be confined in veins. Here's a single point that would be accounted for by stacking 52 of these 40-fg cells in a single narrow vein that is a few microns in diameter. I've indicated four different examples where the spectrometer -- the laser beam -- when the ice is moving underneath it has intersected with that.

Here, instead of all cells, we're looking at methanogens that we're seeing with the other fluorimeter. These three arrows correspond to a single standard average-diameter cell (40 fg). There are two cases -- this one and this one -- that correspond to veins. This is a log scale. One of the vein spikes is about 100 times the height of most of the other signals. The other vein spike is also about 100 times the height of the rest of the signals.

There's going to be interest in the 3,600 meter core at the WAIS divide based on what we found in the top 250 meters. Those samples are mainly used as a test for the Trp signal. Trp signal in red, F420 signal in blue. We have log scale. Cells cover two orders of magnitude for concentration in top 250m. They are as heterogeneously distributed as one could imagine. There seems to be no pattern. Methanogens, on the other hand, are showing a decline (roughly exponential). They are unhappy; they are dying. Why are they dying? They are traveling thousands of kilometers from deserts or ocean through air; they are lifted up and transported and deposited and are sitting at -32 degrees Celsius until finally they get into a vein or wherever it is they are able to metabolize at. What we'd like to do in summer is we expect to be delivered at NICL another 1,000 meters. Then, the next year we will receive another 1,000 meters. Until, finally, we get to bedrock. We can scan quite quickly; it takes about ten minutes to scan a meter.

How do we explain the bursts in which we have up to two-orders-of-magnitude-range of cell sizes or cell numbers? This is what we think is happening: Here, we've plotted probability of dust emission (or dust emission frequency) as a function of windspeed. So, we imagine that we have winds sweeping over the Gobi desert or across the ocean; and, if it's more than about 12 m/s, about 50% of the time, we can lift dust, and we can measure a plume of dust with a satellite. Along with the dust -- we're speculating, but we think it must be correct -- if the wind can lift dust particles, it can lift microbes. The microbes like to be in clusters; they like to be in microbial mass. They like to be in flakes from desert particles or coming from large-size phytoplankton that live on top of the ocean.

So, let's pursue the idea that variability in microbe arrival rates can serve as proxy for high-speed winds and maybe for hurricanes and storms that go back into the distant past -- a fossil record of storms, if you will. We first look at a few datasets; short spans of depth have been converted to age. Here, for two meters, we've got very low background levels and a few spikes. So, this is two spikes in two years. Here, we've got 1.4 years and two spikes. Here, we've got three or four spikes in 1.5 years. Here, we've got four or five spikes in one year. Here, we've got one spike in .6 years. Does it sound like we could have one spike every year or two years or six months? We don't quite know yet. But, here is a kind of ground truth. This is two years of data where, sitting in Barbados with a huge net facing Africa, people have collected dust particles and bacteria. Dust particles are shown in red going from Jan. 2002 to Jan. 2004. So, in two years, we've got maybe four clumps of dust that are arriving in storms from Africa. In blue, we have bacteria, and we have perhaps three clumps in two years from Africa. This is consistent with the rates we first looked at.

And now, I am going to change topics a little bit. The climatologists use CO2 to study Earth's climate, i.e. the transitions between glacial and interglacial periods. It's a reliable record; oxygen-18 relative to oxygen-16 is a reliable record and so is amount of deuterium relative to hydrogen-1. So, let's start with deuterium. Here is the present climate we live in -- a warm climate. Here's the last glacial maximum, when the mammoths died out. So, down is cold. And there are curious spikes -- this is all in eastern Antarctica, in a deep ice core that goes back about one million years. And we've been approved for Ryan Bay to dust-log all the way back to a million years ago. So, down is cold. Here's another cold region. The methane tracks quite nicely the deuterium, so it's a climatological tool. Look at the nitrous oxide, which parenthetically can be made by nitrifying bacteria. So, it's possible, if we examine this nitrous oxide record and compare it with the methane and the deuterium record that we might see hints of something peculiar that might suggest microbial life -- nitrification redox reactions. And, in fact, the woman who prepared this graph labeled what she calls "artifacts" -- meaning, she couldn't understand them. Everything that has an open red diamond - there, there, and this whole region - it doesn't fit with either the methane or the deuterium. And, she just leaves them out when she is doing her studies. What you notice is that the artifacts are concentrated in cold periods, which suggests that whatever they are, there is a climatological relationship. So now, let's see what they are.

We're now going to concentrate on the artifacts -- the nitrous oxide points that don't fall on a nice climatological curve. So, here, we're using another measure of climate -- the ratio of oxygen-18 over oxygen-16, where warm and present on it is here and cold is going down. In Greenland, you have these bizarre hot and cold periods that are separated by about 1,400 years, which are called Dansgaard-Oeschger oscillations. And down here, we're looking at nitrous oxide and comparing with that, and what we find are crazy deviations. Tom Sowers, shown here in green, has some spikes that stick way out above the normal atmospheric contribution of nitrous oxide that is trapped in air bubbles in the ice. It comes from the atmosphere -- it snows, air is trapped. The nitrous oxide component has mysterious artifacts and we use the hypothesis that the explanation of these artifacts is somehow they're loaded at those depths in the ice with microbes.

So, here are two examples. We go to 1,557.2 to 1,557.8 meters. Just where there is a big spike in the nitrous oxide record, sure enough, not agreeing with each other exactly, but within a few decimeters of each other, we have methanogens with a huge spike here -- 150,000 methanogens per cubic centimeter. And up here, we have over a million per cubic centimeter of generally cells. Tryptophan is a proxy for cells. So, spikes there and there, which I think do suggest that among the cells are nitrifiers at that depth. And over here is another example at 3,000 meters, where we have a big spike in F420, indicating methanogens.

Now, this is complicated, and I won't try to go through every little bit of it, but it shows you some of our data. Up here is Tom Sowers' nitrous oxide. This is the excess of microbes at 1,557 meters. Here are several other narrow spikes. And, if we look down at the fluorimeter measurements at the National Ice Core Laboratory (NICL), we find that they are well above the median for every one of those lines -- these are just guidelines to go from the gas data to the fluorimetry data. So, it certainly looks as if we have an explanation for nitrous oxide. Now, methanogens, curiously enough -- here is a whopping enhancement in the F420 signal using the other spectrometer -- 1.5 orders of magnitude above the median -- and some other points in there. And this one occurs at the same depth at which we saw a spike in the N2O, but we don't see a spike in the methane that should accompany the methanogens. And the reason is they didn't make a measurement there; they made measurements only every ten or fifteen meters. So, if they go back to that depth, we predict that they will find a huge spike in methane, and so forth. Now, we jump to the very bottom of the methane record. I've already shown you that in silty ice within fifty or 100 meters of bedrock you have those high signals. It's this silty ice that Tung looked at and counted cells in. And here, in fact, sure enough, you see the fluorimeter detection of methane.

Now, we can take the data that I just showed you and do something amazing. We can calculate the amount of metabolic turnover of carbon per year. So, this is a quantity with dimensions one over time. It's on a log scale. It's what chemists call an Arrhenius plot and it's what physicists call a Boltzmann plot. It's got a straight line. What I did some years ago was collect data that existed then for microbes trapped in rock that was just porous enough for gases to go in and out and to keep them alive. That was at +20 degrees Celsius. And the metabolic rate was there. The point is plotted here. Now, as you go down in temperature, you have the sea floor -- microbes that are living on gases diffused in the sea floor. Here is the silty ice data that we measured a couple of years ago. And we have new points, based on what I showed you in the previous slide, for deep methane (shown here in green circles), and for nitrous oxide (shown here in blue triangles), and for deep Vostok ice at -40 degrees Celsius (shown here with one point). I think this is remarkable and there are two or three fascinating things that you can conclude from this. One is that there is no cutoff -- at least not at -40 degrees Celsius. That means that as you subject microbes to colder and colder temperatures, there are going to be some that can live at minus who-knows. Maybe at some surface of Mars at -80 degrees Celsius we should look. The second thing is that this green line and this dashed purple line are within a factor of two of each other, which leads me to the conjecture that microbes are "immortal"; and, I can tell you what I mean. "Immortality" means that assuming gases can keep providing nutrients, a microbe frozen in ice is able to -- while it cannot move and it cannot produce progeny -- use metabolic energy it is able to extract depending on the temperature you are at to repair "macromolecular damage" to its cell. And we know this top straight line came from measurements in laboratory of aspartic acid amino acid, which is present in all cells. Racemization of aspartic acid goes quite fast at 100 to 150 degrees Celsius, so they generated an Arrenhius line here and I extrapolated down to here. Now, racemization is related to chirality. Aspartic acid is left-handed. All amino acids are left-handed. But, with nature, at any finite temperature, we have some probability of converting an amino acid to right-handed chirality. And the job of a microbe trapped in ice is to repair by e.g. undoing racemization. Racemization means tendency towards equal quantities of both chiralities of a compound. Depurination is one kind of breakdown of DNA. Repairing damage from that doesn't take nearly as much energy as it does to repair damage from racemization of aspartic acid or other amino acids; so, we don't need to worry about that. So, the idea is "immortality" means we keep up with spontaneous thermal damage. How did we make all these measurements? The equation is about as simple as one can imagine. The rate in units of inverse time is given by taking the excess of the gas that they produce (either nitrous oxide or methane), dividing it by the amount of excess cells in terms of carbon atoms, and dividing by time during which the cell is metabolizing. And what you get is this proportionality to e to the (-U / RT). This rate is awfully small. We're talking about a time of about a billion years, here, for repairing damage.

So, the curious thing is, if you remember, in the first part of this talk, we talked about two habitats - one that involved microbes trapped in liquid veins in ice and another with microbes happily adsorbed onto clay grain surfaces and using iron in clay grains. It turns out that life may have originated in veins in ice and on clay grains and this hypothetical origin has powerful advantages over an origin based on a very hot environment. The two schools of thought on how life on Earth originated are cold origin vs. hot origin. Those who believe in hot origin, e.g. down in deep ocean near a vent where it is hundreds of degrees Celsius, have not read a particular paper by Stan Miller and his post-doc Levy about experiments in laboratory with these nucleotide bases, the ones that make up DNA and RNA (C, T, A, G, U for short). They found that at 100 degrees Celsius, which is a mild environment for those who believe in a hot origin of life, the decomposition rate is days to years. For some of the more complex macromolecules, the lifetime at 100 degrees Celsius is measured in minutes. That does not seem reasonable to me as a site where the complex steps in building up macromolecules for life could operate at. But, at zero degrees Celsius, the lifetime for nucleotide bases is 10 ^ 6 years or longer. So, that is encouraging. It turns out that, curiously enough, we normally think that the rate of a process (e.g. a redox reaction) is strongly dependent on temperature. But it also depends in a three-dimensional world on rate of encounter of molecules of type A and type B. If they have to wander around in three dimensions, it's going to take a much longer time than if they're in a vein -- a one-dimensional structure. It turns out that experiments have shown that raising the encounter rate by having frozen medium can beat out temperature dependency. This experiment, measured in graduate student lifetimes, took around six. What they did was take ammonium cyanide and freeze it at dry-ice temperature for 27 years. Then, they opened the freezer and found that the clear ice had turned brown. They didn't, though I wish they had, use a microscope to see if the brown was confined to veins, but I am sure it had to be the case. What they found was, when they melted the ice and filtered it and then analyzed it for all kinds of complex molecules, that this simple molecule ammonium cyanide (NH4CN) had made A, G, U, and various amino acids because of the enhanced encounter rate. A second experiment deals with clay surfaces; I'll tell you more about that in a moment. I'll tell you there is another reason why life in a cold environment would have been attractive. We know that it began several billion years ago. Specifically, the sun was 30% dimmer then and the oceans were frozen. The problem is that after you've made life in veins, how do you get rid of the ice, which is very bright? The Earth would have a difficult time unless you have some event; the cold origin people say that possibly it was an asteroid collision that occurred that melted the oceans. So, that's one hypothesis.

This is getting towards the end. Here's two examples of reactions that occur rapidly in ice veins. This group (Trinks et al.) got on a ship, got sea ice, did experiments on the ship, and found that they were able to synthesize complex nucleotides. This spike is at 40 units; this is using some biological tool. Biologist over there -- what would this be where you apply an electric field? Electrophoresis. This is a mass spectrum. Here, by freezing some compounds in a solution, they not only able to get up to at least eleven bases, but they had added a dye so that they could show you that in fact in the ice polycrystal the dye has concentrated in the veins.

Now, to talk about two-dimensional concentration, the clay grains have a long, historic role of being the butt of speculation about life arising. This is something that not every biologist realizes, but clay can adsorb DNA molecules. This is the normal helix and on the clay, when it is epitaxially attached, it converts to a different helicity, the A-form. The A-form is 200 times more resistant to solar ultraviolet, which was a serious threat to the origin of life. The second thing that clay grains can do is that adsorbed cations can act as bridges. Imagine that I am showing you positive charges here attached to lattice sites in the clay; there is an electrical attraction that encourages adsorption of nucleic acids. Here is adenine (and e.g. guanine has a similar shape), which happens to have the proper lattice spacing to have a fit to the hexagonal lattice at the surface of a clay grain. They're bound nicely and this facilitates them hopping a little bit and polymerizing.

Now, we're getting to the end. Here are some of the highlights. These, in my opinion, are the most interesting. Presence of microbes serves as proxy for storms that we hope to be able to elucidate over the last billion years via high winds in storms transporting these microbes from deserts and oceans to polar ice. Spikes in climate record can be interpreted and straightforwardly taken into account; they are due to in-situ nitrifiers or methanogens. The rate of metabolism for microbes obeys proportionality to e to the (-U / RT) and this expression has no cut-off; life may have arisen on Mars and still be there, slowly metabolizing using clay grains or veins in ice, for us to discover. Clay grains and veins in ice are locales for synthesis of complex biomolecules.

--

Questions and Answers

1. So, do you know how long it takes bacterial chlorophyll to degrade at these temperatures? Are you looking for autofluorescence?

PP: Yes, and that's an object lesson. Bobby's machine is a methanogen machine. It was going to be a methanogen/chlorophyll machine. He made it out of aluminum. The machine shop beautified it and added the aluminum. Aluminum emits fluorescence at 675 nm, which is exactly the peak of emission for chlorophyll. So, we were all set to look for chlorophyll. Next time, we'll make it stainless steel or something that doesn't fluoresce. Yeah, I think it's interesting. We know that somehow they can survive in at least tens of meters in permafrost -- chlorophyll-utilizing microbes. Whether they can find an alternate metabolism process at 3,000 meters -- it's an interesting question. What do you think?

Asker: I think the question is how fast does the chlorophyll degrade and whether or not over long time scales one could have a signal of photosynthesis that occurred at the surface.

PP: Why can't the microbes repair the chlorophyll?

Asker: Potentially, but if all they do is photosynthesis, then they're not going to be living for very long.

PP: Well, maybe they abandoned it. Maybe we won't find any surviving chlorophyll below 100 meters and that they have discovered by adaptation some other secondary source.

2. Buford, if you take a shovel full of dust full of microbes and you stick it in a deep fridge, how much of the stuff survives and for how long?

PP: I can't answer that, because I've never done that experiment. Let me tell you about a bizarre experiment that has been done. If you take E. Coli, which are happiest at blood temperature, and you put them into the Arctic ocean for two months, they then can no longer live at +37 degrees Celsius. Their growth curve is peaked at -2 degrees Celsius. Now, that is amazing adaptation. And I think it has to happen when microbes that are not psychrophiles -- which means cold-lovers -- are brought from the desert or from the bottom of the ocean and are dropped into snow. Some of them are going to die very quickly and others will adapt. It's just expressing some gene that is designed to defend them from cold.

3. Normally, when people speak of adaptation, they mean -- I should be more careful. The process that you are describing is bacteria that have the capability.

PP: Absolutely -- it's not learned. They are just expressing a gene that is there already.

Asker: Okay. And since you said they cannot reproduce, there's not -- you're just left with the numbers that happened to have had that adaptation.

PP: Yes. We haven't spent much time looking in the top 100 meters or so -- just that one slide that I showed of methanogens falling off exponentially. I think that's very interesting. We want to do it in the Greenland ice, too, to see just how many of them survive at different depths.

4. Just a general question. When you see these peaks, say, in products of some metabolism like methane or something like that, can you look for depletion of reactants like hydrogen in the same region?

PP: Yeah.

Asker: Have you done this and do you see essentially that where you see peaks in methane you see depletion in hydrogen, indicating active methanogens?

PP: No -- that would be a good thing to try to do. We've just scratched the surface and the reason that our data is so spotty is that we tried to skim the cream off first. Now, we can go back and do it more methodically. You need four times as many moles of hydrogen as you have of CO2 in order for methanogenesis to use that pathway. We've calculated -- we wanted to find out could this be happening -- are we running out of hydrogen? The answer is no, because the diffusion rate is six orders of magnitude higher for hydrogen. It can come from large distances and keep replenishing.

5. When you say that it is a problem for life to have started in a hot place because of the fast rate of decomposition of molecules, isn't that balanced by increase in rates of reactions that make these molecules?

PP: Yeah, it is. But, we'd get some benefit from -- through channeling in one-dimension, the encounter rate is very much higher. If one is traveling in an ocean, then the encounter rate is certainly paying a big penalty there. But, I just find that at hundreds of degrees Celsius -- it seems to me that it's a losing battle. Maybe there's a compromise at 100 degrees Celsius or some intermediate. We don't know the answer -- we haven't done the experiment.

6. If life started in ice, but couldn't reproduce, then it must have learned to reproduce after it warmed up?

PP: Yeah, that's a good point. Either that or else I am really selling short their ingenuity. For example, let's suppose we have these dwarf cells that are a few tenths of a micron in diameter. And the temperature in the surface of the sea ice is -20 degrees Celsius. They may be 5-10 microns in diameter -- they may be able to reproduce happily.

--


