Title: Inflation and String Cosmology

Prof. Andrei Linde

Physics Department, Stanford University

November 26th, 2007

--

Transcribed on July 18th, 2018.

--

(A thing to keep in mind is that "inflation" was a concept that came after the idea of the Big Bang. The Big Bang idea comes from the experimental fact that the world is expanding and that if we extrapolate back in time, at some point the world could have been the size of a point. Inflation as we know it now refers to the idea that there was an exceedingly brief phase that occured shortly after the Big Bang where a large amount of expansion occurred. During this inflationary period, the world expanded at a speed faster than the speed of light and energy was spread so far that there exists at this moment matter at places that our cosmological horizon is yet to reach. We note that the cosmological horizon is related to whether light can reach us from some far-away place and thus is also related to the speed of light.)

--

So, you see. A picture is worth a million words. This is the result of the WMAP experiment. Nobody laugh? This is a computer simulation. But, the idea is the following. For many years, we were trying to think why our universe is so uniform? Why is there such great spherical symmetry and different parts of the universe are similar to what we see right now? This was the basis of something that is called the cosmological principle. Then we were trying to find out the origin for this cosmological principle -- the reason why we see the universe in different parts the same as it is right now -- and we came up with inflationary cosmology. After the first year of developing this theory, it became apparent to some of us that this inflationary theory has some interesting additional luggage. By the same mechanism which makes the universe uniform in our part of the universe which we see right now, it makes itself 100% non-uniform, including like a fractal. Here, you see me. Looking like a fractal on extremely large-length scale. This is the main subject of my talk today -- I will tell you about inflationary cosmology and why the universe looks like a fractal, I will tell you something about the relation between inflation and string theory.

So, let's see how it works. I will start with a simple model of inflation, which is chaotic inflation. There were several different inflationary models. Perhaps the first one was the model proposed by Alexei Starobinsky in 1979 in Russia. This is a pretty complicated model and what it proposed was rather different from what we consider inflationary theory right now, but it worked. After that was a model by Alan Guth. It didn't work, but the ideas why it should have worked were very clearly presented there, so the main notion of inflation started at that time. Starting from this moment, it was '82 and I was in Russia at that time and mail did not work well between Russia and the United States as it would take two months for us to receive a paper written here. That was good because otherwise I would have received a paper written by Alan Guth and Erick Weinberg who had proved that it was impossible to improve their model. And I went on to improve it. That ushered in -- I got the preprint on it already after I improved it, so it was irreversible. Sometimes, you can do less, I can say. One way or another, this was a second branch of development of inflation. New inflation was much better than old inflation, but it was still not easy to do. On the other hand, there was chaotic inflation. It was here in '83 and it was so simple. Just take a potential which is quadratic. It may or may not be a right model, but it is certainly the easiest model to explain how inflation may work. And these was the type of model starting from which we started believing that inflation is a real, serious thing, rather than something that people must invent to live comfortably. Because, it's so simple. You take the theory of scalar field with simplest quadratic potential. This is the scalar field (horizontal). This is its potential (vertical). This is a parabola (whole graph). If the scalar field is small, which is what we have in this room -- you have a field that is small -- then it will easily oscillate. But if it is large, what we have found after we solve the equation for scalar field in an expanding universe is that the scalar field does not oscillate. It moves down very slowly and during this time the universe inflates and produces quantum fluctuations, which people study in the sky and find and sort out, etc. If the scalar field is any higher, then something interesting happens. These quantum fluctuations become so large that sometimes they can easily push the scalar field higher and higher and the universe then enters a stage of self-reproduction. So, it reproduces different parts of it and the universe enters a stage of eternal inflation. All this happens at energies which are still below Planck density. If one goes above Planck density, then one cannot trust anything. All of these things that I am discussing are for densities below Planck density.

So, first, the general basis of it. The basis is the Einstein equation -- and this is a little bit of a simplified version of it. Because, this is applied to a homogeneous universe. Here is a-scale-factor for the  universe; I didn't write here a term "+ 1 / (a ^ 2)", because if inflation starts, this term rapidly exponentially disappears. Here is energy of scalar field divided by three, because I am using a system of units where gravitational coupling constant is one-third. Don't ask me why it is so invisible. Actually, I said it wrong -- it is in a system of units 1 / (8 * pi * G) = 1, where G is gravitational constant. So, it is just convenient to use these huge units; it does not matter with which units you calculate everything. I did not even write here the terms corresponding to gradient energy of the scalar field and kinetic energy, because if inflation starts, these two terms rapidly disappear. So, the only thing that I need to show is that inflation may start from oscillation. After that, my slide's dishonesty may be forgiven, I hope. Because, actually, people study what happens if you get these terms. Now, this is equation describing motion of homogeneous scalar field. Forget about the second term (3 * H * phi) for a second; this is phi-two-dots and this is "- m ^ 2 * phi". This is equation of motion for harmonic oscillator. Forget about the second term (alpha * x-dot) for a second; this is x-two-dots and this is "-k * x". So, these are the same thing. This equation for homogeneous scalar field is equation for harmonic oscillator. This is the friction term for a harmonic oscillator; so, one can have a force that acts in harmonic oscillator with a force that is proportional to its velocity, which is viscosity or friction or whatever. Then, you add this term and the harmonic oscillator does not oscillate so well; it just oscillates with decreasing amplitude. If this term is extremely large, then oscillation is overdamped and it moves extremely slowly downstairs. If you consider equation for scalar field in an expanding universe, this term appears -- Hubble constant is a-dot divided by a -- and it shows you relative speed of expansion of the universe. If the universe expands quickly, then equation of motion for scalar field can be shown to contain that term, which works as friction for scalar field. So, these things I am not planning on proving, but essentially, I am proving them right now. These things are simple. People have written equations like that -- thirty to fifty years ago, they studied those equations and somehow did not find the simplest one. Because, probably, maybe they were working in a different direction like studying scalar fields near black holes -- different kind of stuff. But, this solution they did not pay attention to. So, what I am talking about is the following. Suppose that my scalar field was very large. If the scalar field initially was very large, then Hubble constant was very large. If Hubble constant was very large, then friction term was very large. If friction term was very large, then like with a harmonic oscillator, the scalar field was moving down extremely slowly. So if my field was large, Hubble constant was large, friction term was large, scalar field was practically frozen on this wall. It was moving down extremely slowly because of this friction term. (This is the friction term -- "3 * H * phi".) Now, if it moves down very slowly, then for a long time it remains at the same height. If it remains at the same height, this term ("m ^ 2 / 6 * phi ^ 2") is almost constant. If this term is almost constant, you solve this equation -- "a-dot over a" is nearly constant. And this is the simplest equation in mathematical physics.

It has a solution, which is exponential. (This is the stage of inflation.) So, the logic is large phi means large H means large friction means the field phi moves down slowly means H remains almost constant -- and you have this solution. That's the equation. Nothing can be simpler than that. I don't know why this solution had not been discovered fifty years ago. Maybe because people did not know that this could be interesting. Well, after it has been discovered, what do we do about it? This stage is going to end. If we look back at our transparency -- if our field is here (at medium height on the wall), then despite the friction, eventually it goes down. When it goes down, Hubble constant becomes small, friction becomes small, we start oscillating -- when we oscillate, we produce particles -- when we produce particles, the universe becomes cold, and then the normal stage of the big bang starts. So, why do we need an inflation stage if at the end we become cold? Well, because during this exponential expansion, which we just studied, our universe becomes astonishingly large. If it starts with a very tiny initial volume and it becomes exponentially large and if this initial volume is very curved, very uneven, very unisotropic, then after this expansion, we live on a surface of an enormously large cosmic balloon and the surface of the balloon is flat. Parallel lines do not intersect because if one, say, lives on a sphere, then though at the south and north pole where parallel lines would intersect, the opposite side of the sphere is exponentially far away from you. So, that's the goal of inflation -- it makes the universe huge, uniform, homogeneous, isotropic, flat -- parallel lines do not intersect -- and it makes the universe empty. That is bad news, because we do not live in an empty universe. Well, it is not exactly empty, because matter is created after inflation. It first takes all particles away. But, then it reproduces all particles. But then, if the universe is completely homogeneous, this is also bad news. Because, if it's completely homogeneous, then how do we get galaxies? So, what inflation does is it takes quantum fluctuations from the vacuum, which is right now invisible -- it stretches them rapidly to exponentially large scale, it freezes them because of the friction term, and then when inflation ends, the quantum fluctuations unfreeze, and in places where they accumulate without breaking up, you have galaxies, and in places where they accumulate with only no norm, then you have no energy. Then, there are waves, and then you have structure in the universe. So, that's the basic mechanism, which explains -- first, why the universe is so homogeneous -- and second, how one produces inhomogeneities in this universe.

So then, when one does it, one has this map, which is produced by WMAP satellite. This is a true one, not the mock heat one which I've showed you in the beginning. Now, let's zoom at one part of it and look at it and try to understand its meaning. This is what we find when we look at different parts of the sky -- we see that the sky is slightly-different temperature in different directions. The difference in temperature between this and this is like 10 ^ -5 Kelvin. These people -- it is unbelievable what they did. They measured temperature of the sky when it appeared at 10 ^ -5 seconds. What are the reasons why it is slightly uneven here? Well, what we see is a photograph all over the sky -- the whole sky serves as one huge photographic plate. And we see a photograph of simple quantum fluctuations that produced the early stage of inflation at the time 10 ^ -30 seconds after the Big Bang frozen and expanded on this enormously large scale and then have produced these slight changes in density and in temperature. We use our sky as a photographic plate and the sky shows you what happened 10 ^ -30 seconds after the creation of the world. So, that's a fantastic story and this is really interesting.

I must admit that I never believed when this theory was proposed that people would ever test it to be that way. I mean, this theory was so beautiful that it was clear that it must be right. But, of course, when your friends come to you with this kind of present, then you should not say, "oh, I knew it before"; you are just trembling and waiting and what else can you say? All this pride goes away after you see that it is possible. And then, this is what is possible. This is WMAP graph. This line is a prediction of the spectrum of these dots. So, this yellow line is prediction of the simplest inflationary model. These black points are what WMAP has produced and these are points produced by BOOMERANG -- they are not so well defined. These are points brought by some other experiment right now here. I was talking with people who are continuing this measurement in this part of the spectrum and they are showing the points which come to the curve even closer right now. They do not want really to give their results at the moment because they have not published, so it is like a secret, but the secret is that the points are coming closer. I remember discussing signal deviation with WMAP people and they are dealing with their mouth shut and not telling us anything for a long time. You ask them, "what is going on?" and they are just adamant not telling us. The only thing that you know is that you have two choices -- the points can go away from the curve or the points can come closer to the curve. Guess what is happening? We are waiting and waiting and the points came closer to the curve. So, these guys right now are dealing with points closer to the curve. So, this is good news.

Experimental predictions of inflation are the following. The universe should be homogeneous, isotropic, and flat. This capital-omega is the ratio of density of the universe to critical density. Critical density is the minimum density that for a given speed of expansion is the one at which the universe can be flat. If the given Hubble constant leads to larger density than this critical density, then the world is frozen (i.e. will stop expanding); if it is smaller than this critical density, then the world is open (i.e. in terms of topology). Our inflationary prediction is that the world is flat. So, a prediction for inflation goes like that. And, experimental data right now is like that -- (capital-omega)_total is 1.003 +- 0.01. Don't really trust these last numbers; they are just something I took from one of the latest published papers. But, don't trust them. I mean, they are too good to be true and it is probably true that they are too good to be true. So, let's just wait for what they say. But, what is true is that in '95, the best idea of what (capital-omega)_total was was .3. So, we were all trying to prove or invent a theory of inflation which explains .3 -- i.e., an open universe or open inflation. We were trying to do it; there were about 5-10 different models of open inflation and I participated in it. Out of all models, all of them died -- I mean, we were unable to do it. When we studied it and we tried to do this open inflation, one after another these models died. There is only one model which still survives and it is totally ugly -- and I can tell you it is ugly because I invented it. I know that it is ugly. So, I am just telling you that it is difficult to get anything but (capital-omega)_total that is one. And that's what experiments right now show. Surely, if experimentalists will find that (capital-omega)_total is not equal to one, we will find a way to explain it. But, this is quite hard -- that is all. You may trust me. Another thing is that inflationary perturbations should have simple statistics -- i.e. we should have e.g. Gaussian perturbations -- because, they appear from quadratic fluctuations of some of quantum Gaussian theory. They are also typically adiabatic, which means that there is preservation of temperature and not preservation of chemical composition of the universe. They have nearly flat [power] spectrum, which means that at a given low length of scale, the spectrum will be approximately the same (i.e. independent of scale -- zooming into a flat line gives a flat line). Then, there is a slight sophistication here. It is not exactly scale-invariant -- it is a little bit non-scale-invariant. This came in a package where people had found this expression for typical overall case and they found that, typically, in the simplest models there is a logarithmic deviation from scale invariance. This is similar to what happened in high-energy physics. In high-energy physics, there was an era of scaling -- Bjorken scaling everything. Who got Nobel prizes? Those people who found this logarithm deviations, which is asymptotic freedom in QCD, which leads to confinement of quarks and which also leads to asymptotic freedom at higher energies. So, this tiny logarithm -- when these people found the spectrum, one of the predictions is that it is close to one but not equal to one. And that's what people see right now in the skies -- that it is not equal to one. What is an analogy between this logarithm here and this small value here (".01")? Well, this tiny deviation from one is reponsible in inflationary cosmology for eternal inflation. The analogy of quark confinement is eternal inflation. It's a strange thing -- I do not want to go into a detailed discussion of that -- but that's how it works. Eternal inflation -- self-reproduction of the universe -- because at large scales, the logarithm becomes larger and larger and perturbations grow large. Observations show that the values of the spectrum are close to one but not exactly one. By the way -- I forgot to mention -- people who will save our shorts are sitting here in this auditorium -- those who told us that actually (capital-omega)_total is equal to one because of the contribution of dark energy. So, yes, some of them are sitting here. Now, we know them. The issue is it happened like this. I was at a conference at UCLA and then there was an announcement that supernovas tell us that there is some additional contribution to energy density of the universe that may save inflationary theory from a contradiction. I called my friends and said, "Is it true?" And they said, "Well, maybe." And then the next day, they called and said, "Yeah, it looks like it's true." And then I called my wife and she was at that time at Santa Barbara talking with David Gross. And David Gross at that time told her, "Oh, it's so bad that inflation is finally bad," and he politely smiled. And my wife asked him, "Why is that?" He said, "Oh, well, because I just came from Princeton, and they finally, completely, violently showed that omega is .3, which means that inflation is certainly bad." And I remember talking, "The other day, right now, at the conference at UCLA, they just proved that there is some additional dark energy which makes everything fine." David says, "No, I came from the real conference in Princeton -- it's not UCLA -- it's Princeton. And they know that omega is .3." So, the next day, all the bosses at his institute were covered by a newspaper saying that it is one." That's how these things happen. In addition to all these parts, one may also study amplitude of gravitational waves, not just spots of temperature -- something else, e.g. gravitational waves produced by these models. And gravity waves in simple models are predicted to be at a level that may be found already by one satellite soon and if not by one satellite then by a series of experiments that are under construction right now. So, it is possible to get still another confirmation of inflationary theory or maybe not, because the amplitude of this other type of quantum fluctuation (which I am not going to go into detailed discussion about right now) may be too small. It depends on the model. There is a slim chance. The chance depends on with whom you are talking -- whether it is slim chance, no chance, very very bad chance, etc. -- that you are going to find these tensor modes. And I can discuss these, but let's keep going because otherwise I may go over.

Sometimes -- not always right now, because people are getting more educated -- but sometimes -- when I give talks people ask me, "What are the alternatives?" Getting educated means that if people ask me about alternatives I become like, "What alternatives?" Then, they say, "What about ekpyrotic/cyclic scenario that some people are writing books about and that seem to solve the same problems as your theory does?" So, here is the history. Original version was like two branes colliding and after that it was supposed to be Big Bang except that they made an error in sign and it became a Big Crunch and there were several other errors. So, that model completely did not work and surprisingly so. Then, it was replaced by a cyclic scenario which assumed that our universe came from a set of cycles -- collapse, expansion, collapse, expansion, etc. -- but in order to study what is going on one must first solve the singularity problem and so far it was not done. So, there is not much to discuss. Except, last year there was interesting progress -- a so-called "new ekpyrotic scenario" from Spring of 2007. Those people were quite happy and they invented a model which was a combination of "ghost condensate theory", "curvaton scenario", and "ekpyrotic scenario" -- the three most exotic models combined together. They allowed one to go through the singularity -- actually, no -- they allow one to come close to the singularity and then bounce off. Then, after that one can study everything. So, this was pretty interesting. They wrote one paper, then another, and then a third paper, saying that "Finally, now, we have a working alternative for inflation." Well, these kinds of models are based on theory of ghost condensate and I will not go into details discussing what it is, but the authors of the ghost condensate theory recently have written a series of papers saying that actually this is a very bad theory. But, the authors of the [new ekpyrotic scenario] paper didn't listen, so we decided to check. And, when we checked it recently -- and this is right now a paper in preparation -- in this kind of theory, you find, if you study it carefully, this theory contains ghosts. Ghosts are particles with negative energy. So, the spectrum of energy in this theory is unbounded from below. It's unstable. It momentarily disappears. So, this is a bad theory. I am announcing it, while the paper later one will be able to check. I am saying the general pattern is this -- it is difficult to come up with an alternative. There is no novel theory. Maybe there will be some; we just do not know. At the moment, we do not have one to try.

Now, I am going to talk about inflation in string theory. Because, it was so easy to draw a parabola and get inflation. It was miraculously easy. But, of course, if you go to something more serious -- and most people consider string theories are more serious than this parabolic potential -- then can we get inflation there? And unfortunately, this business was not so good. It was not so good not only w.r.t. inflation but w.r.t. string theory, as well. If one just writes down the typical potential of string theory or specifically string theory type IIB, one has energy of all different scalar fields, which are called modular fields, and there is another field which is called dilaton, and there is another field which is corresponding to the logarithm of compactification of extra dimensions. Because, string theory is based on an assumption that one has extra dimensions -- like six dimensions in a simplest version -- and these e.g. six dimensions are compactified. The radius of this compactified space is very tiny and something keeps the space compactified. Then, if you write down the energy of this compactified space as a function of the radius of compactification, then the radius appears in the expression like this -- "e ^ (sqrt(2) * X - sqrt(6) * Y)" -- exponent with minusing of a radius [associated with Y] here. Well, this is slightly different from how one might usually see it in string literature, because I've written it in terms of minimally normalized -- harmonically normalized -- fields. In string theory, it is easier to write it in form where kinetic terms of a field look very complicated. But if one simplifies things, that is how it works. This potential is very steep. So, this theory wants to make the dilaton field [associated with X] negative and extremely large and this theory wants to make the field [associated with Y] positive and extremely large. So, this explains that the X-involving term causes the exponential to die and causes potential energy to become zero. However, on the way to reaching zero, the size of the compactified dimensions wants to be infinite. So, string theory does not want to be four-dimensional; it is ten-dimensional and wants to remain so. So, this was the problem and for this problem the standard answer was, "Yeah, but we just thought string theory is so complicated and we want to learn how to deal with it later." So, it was '85 when the string theory of this type was proposed and then well, in the 00's -- so fifteen years later -- we still want to learn about this later. So, we start trying to learn especially because we were forced to learn by a cosmologist -- again, by the same people in this auditorium who are telling us that the universe is accelerating. Because, now we have a double challenge -- firstly, to stabilize these internal dimensions -- and secondly, to explain why the universe is accelerating. Because, if potential energy is exponentially vanishing, then the universe will not accelerate. Any kind of energy just vanishes. So, there will be nothing that will force the universe to accelerate. Or, uniquely, have any energy whatsoever -- everything will just rapidly dry out. So, this was a serious problem and it started from a comment made by Ed Witten at a conference in India. He said, "Well, I do not know how to explain exponential expansion in string theory." And when Ed says he does not know, everyone is in panic. They started thinking, "Well, how could it be?" Then, we started thinking and other people started thinking and this resulted in these two sets of constructions. In 2001, the dilaton field was stabilized by this group of people. In 2003, this second field, which is the volume, was stabilized at Stanford by Kachru, Kallosh, and Trivedi; and, I was working as a cosmology consultant.

So, what we found is that if one takes the theory -- the construction is pretty complicated and not nice and the one advantage left is that it seems to work -- firstly, if one starts with a theory with a runaway potential; then, if one takes into account some nonperturbative corrections -- so, it didn't work easily when one just studies perturbative corrections -- these nonperturbative corrections should be calculated when your universe is already supposed to be compactified. So, one does not calculate them in 10-dimensional space. One calculates them already assuming that the universe is four-dimensional. And this was the first strange thing -- the analogy of this is the following -- there exists something called Casimir forces. If one has compact distance between bounds or walls or one has something tiny, then there is a force which may make the object even more tiny depending on what kind of story you have. But if one tries to understand these Casimir forces in infinite space, one will not get an idea that these forces are positive, because they are not. So, here also, one starts with compactified space and studying one or two different details which exist only because the space is compactified and checks that these forces may be sufficient to keep the space compactified. So, that was the first thing. One more thing we found was that there is some way of stabilizing the radius of compactification, except that vacuum energy in the stabilized state was negative. And that's not the universe where we live -- in this universe, we can not live and we can only die. From the point of view of cosmology, anti de Sitter space is not a comfortable place to live in, because it expands and collapses within a time equal to "one over square root of vacuum energy". Talking in real terms, just momentarily. So, we would not have seminars there; we would just die instantly. Now, what was the third step? It was possible to uplift the minimum so that it is small de Sitter. How small is small? Well, any. One could make it high or one could make it anti de Sitter. It was possible to uplift this minimum and still have it stable. So, that was the method. And then the question was, "What world do we need to make it as small as our friend sitting here, which is miserably small, but still positive in energy?" So, that will be the problem of the cosmological constant, which I will discuss later. But, it is possible to fine-tune it to whatever number one wants for reasons to be discussed later.

Now, the resume here. This [KKLT] scenario allows us to describe the metastable cosmological constant. Why "metastable"? Because the energy for a particular minimum is positive, but the energy at infinity it is zero. So, this state [at left] is always higher than state at infinity, so one can tunnel there. Is that bad? Well, yes, it is bad. But, if you want to know how long you'll be awake until you die, in this scenario -- the simplest model -- it is 10 ^ (10 ^ 180) years. So, that's a pretty long time. We can describe metastable vacuum state. But, despite numerous attempts, we do not have any reasonable string versions of dark energy theory. I mean, we do not have any no-go theorems -- i.e. that it is not possible. In fact, we have go theorem -- i.e. it is possible. We take any inflationary model which is possible, as I will show, in string theory and put your boot on the potential and damp it down almost to zero. But, this would require exponentially-precise fine-tuning. One goal of the fine-tuning which is necessary to have here is level of cosmological constant, which can be taken care of by anthropic principle, as well. But then, one also needs to have slopes of the potential that are exponentially precise. What we say in a conclusion: "no excuses". So, as of now, it will be interesting if our friends sitting here will ever discover dynamical dark energy. This would be a real change for many of us.

Now, there are two types of string inflation models that we know right now. The first type of inflationary model -- because until we stabilized everything, there was no sense to do anything in this direction -- we did not even have de Sitter or the expanding, accelerating universe now and not just expanding, accelerating universe in the past. So, we have two classes of models. The first class is modular inflation, depending on with whom you are talking, and the other class is brane inflation. So, this is not, well, our "brains". The brane is moving inside some Calabi-Yau space or whatever. This historically was the first set of inflationary models. One associates the scalar field with a distance between some brane walls captured in tiny Calabi-Yau space and one studies how the energy of the brane walls depends on distance between them and the way that this energy can be responsible for inflation. Some models of this type can be constructed. A more economical model would be -- forget about branes -- the walls, not "brains" -- yes, I am Russian, so my pronunciation is not precise. Sometimes I make mistakes in writing.

So, here is one of the models of brane inflation. This is an illustration showing how complex this stuff is. This another model of brane inflation. This is a model of modular inflation. All of these models are very complicated. We have a feeling that they may be very complicated for one or two of two reasons. Or maybe, just our life is so nasty. Or maybe, string theory is really not a good theory. Because, otherwise, we should say maybe inflation is not a good theory. I would not say so. I would say they have some temporary problems. But, can we actually do it?

Yes, we are writing right now a paper together with -- well, my guest who is sitting here -- Alexander Westphal. It shows that one can take this part (have superpotential) -- if we forget about this term (without "B * e ^ (-b * T)"). This [simplified superpotential together with Kaehler potential] is a basic KKLT model. This is necessary because branes have a couple [more] complications anyway. We just add an extra term to this model and fine-tune the coefficients here. Then, it is possible to get potential similar to this curve and this [arbitrary] part of the curve can be fine-tuned to be flat. Then, we have inflation. So, it is possible to have inflation in string theory. It is not nice -- it is fine-tuned. This is the best that we have right now. A similar situation happened with us many years ago. Maybe we can confirm that when we started trying to implement inflation in supergravity, it did not work easily. It did not work easily, because supergravity was complicated. It took us a lot of years to formulate supergravity inflation in a nice way, so that many easy models of inflation in supergravity right now exist. In the version with quadratic potential -- exactly quadratic potential -- right now, if one writes down pretty simple Kaehler potential and superpotential, one can get inflationary theory in supergravity, which is for purely quadratic potential up to very, very large values. But, it took us 17 years for all the invention of Kaehler inflation two-dimensional supergravity version of it. So, here, we have just started. Four years ago, we learned how to do it and the theory is more complicated than that.

Now, there is some other complication in this -- an unexpected one -- in all this class of theories. I do not know whether it is a complication or whether it is something else. If we study the structure of inflation in this theory, it is possible to prove that the Hubble constant, which is a speed of expansion of the universe in these scenarios, is bounded in this class of models by gravitino mass. So, Hubble constant cannot be very large. Usually, people who study gravitinos right now, in supergravitino terminology, tell us that a gravitino may be around 1,000x heavier than a proton. Maybe something like that or even smaller than that. Then, Hubble constant cannot be greater than 1,000x mass of a proton, which is not so nice, because people who study inflation typically what they rate those numbers is around 10 ^ 15 proton masses. So, this would be a very strong constraint on this class of models. And, this will also limit our possibility to find gravitational waves which are produced during inflation. If gravitino mass is 1 TeV, then the constraint on the amplitude of gravitational waves would be between 10 ^ (-3 ^ 3) to 10 ^ (-3 ^ 4). So, this is absolutely unmeasurable whatsoever. Except for, there is right now a class of supergravity models where gravitino can be as large as 10 ^ 13 GeV, and in this case the amplitude of gravitational waves can be measurable. What I am trying to say is -- we are in this business -- it is not easy -- the models right now are not nice -- we have some interesting problems of unifying all of these with expected phenomenology with the idea that we can find something at LHC, because this is the scale that we expect from supergravity. And, this scale would lead to very strong constraints on scale of inflation in string theory.

But, what I really wanted to talk about here is something else. And, maybe it is almost philosophical. This is something that I mentioned in the beginning. Previously and even right now, when I am teaching popular astronomy, I am opening the textbook and the first thing that I read there and that I teach to all the students is something called the "cosmological principle". The cosmological principle is something that says the universe is everywhere the same. So, all books are writing this right now -- and why? Because Einstein was one of those who invented the cosmological principle and used it in his life. Because, we look to the right and we look to the left and we see the same universe everywhere. And we say, "We have experimental evidence that the universe is uniform." So, it must be uniform -- we do not know why it is uniform, but it is experimental data. So, that's called cosmological principle. I used to make a joke that some people who do not have ideas sometimes have principles. This was Einstein's principle. But, then we exchange it right now with anthropic principle. And I am afraid to use the same joke here, because I am using anthropic principle and most of you are using anthropic principle and several other people are using anthropic principle. So, I will not say that they are completely brainless. Otherwise, I would not want yet to write [the anthropic principle] here, or maybe I am not just dependent, then. This is their idea. The idea is the following -- if one takes an inflationary universe, it expands so fast that if one starts with a tiny domain of the universe, it becomes blown up all out of proportion -- and you look to the right and you look to the left and you see everything the same. But then, if one takes into account these huge quantum fluctuations, then they can divide the universe into different pieces with different problems. If one has a universe with a different vacuum state, then in some of these parts of the universe, one can jump to a different vacuum state and one may stay there. So, the whole universe is not obliged to be everywhere the same. And it does not contradict any of the experimental data, because we cannot see these other parts. We live in some tiny part.

Previously, it was very uneasy to talk about anthropic principle, even with your friends. Because, they will think secretly that you're crazy. They will not tell it to you, because they are polite -- some of them not and they openly say it to you. But, right now, it becomes easier, because we have the "string landscape scenario". And what is the string landscape scenario? This is what it is -- we learned one way how to uplift this vacuum. With this KKLT scenario, when we invented it, we found that, actually, there are many different ways of doing so. The way how you uplift it depends on how this Calabi-Yau space is bounded in this tiny thing that is compactified -- on how exactly it is compactified. It is a very complicated structure and it has many holes in it and it has fluxes there, etc. So, there are many possibilities there to do the job. The number of these possibilities was calculated for the first time in '87. It was not taken very seriously at that time, because normally a new wave is -- it was part of a new wave about vacuum being stable or not. But, these people came up with a number -- 10 ^ 1500. And then, this was ignored, because people looked at it and went, "Huh -- oh my god, this must be bad." Then, Bousso and Polchinski came up with a very similar number based on a completely different principle. The paper was specifically motivated by idea of, "How can we solve the cosmological constant problem?" which we discussed shortly. And, they came up with a similar number. But, it was not quite clear yet at that time a way we can stabilize this mini-vacuum. Then, we came up with an idea of how to stabilize it and after that, a number of vacua was calculated, and indeed the total number was extremely large. So, we have -- firstly, a huge universe -- then, in this huge universe, we have islands. We have uplifted vacua -- you see? You take some vacuum, you uplift it, and you can live here,  you can live here, or probably you cannot live there. And there is a number of vacua here, so you live in a place where you can live -- that's very simple.

In fact, something very similar was known to us for years, already. Some times ago, when we studied supersymmetric SU(5) theory -- so, it was even before supergravity -- we knew that there are three different vacuum states in the theory: SU(5), SU(4)xU(1), SU(3)xSU(2)xU(1). [The last one is our state.] But, if the universe originally was hot, then in the early universe, only this vacuum existed (i.e. SU(5) at left). These ones (i.e. SU(4)xU(1) and SU(3)xSU(2)xU(1) at right) appeared only after the universe cooled down. So, how does one jump from this place to that place (i.e. from SU(5) to SU(3)xSU(2)xU(1))? People studied it and concluded that there is no way one can jump. So, what do we do? What we do is we have inflation. If one has inflation, then during inflation, the field will experience quantum fluctuations and these quantum fluctuations will put it here, put it back here, put it back here, put it here.

Then, after that, inflation subsided and the universe becomes divided into exponentially large regions. In some of them, one is sitting in SU(4)xU(1). In some of them, one is sitting in SU(5). In some of them, one is sitting in SU(3)xSU(2)xU(1). But only in these parts (i.e. with SU(3)xSU(2)xU(1)) one may live, because only these parts have electrons and protons and stuff like that. In all the other places, physics is totally different. So, this was the basis of solution of this problem -- this was SUSY landscape. Then, after that was supergravity landscape.

Then, right now, we are talking about string landscape. We have a universe divided into many different regions and only some of these regions one may have conditions which are sufficient for life of our type.

One of the most famous examples of this is the solution of the cosmological constant problem. The cosmological constant problem, a reminder -- measuring, one would think, vacuum energy must give us zero. But then, one thinks of quantum fluctuations, one thinks of energy of scalar fields, one thinks about all these vacua. Then, one says, "Well, who knows? I don't know what is the energy of the vacuum." Then, why is it so tiny? And that was a discovery which was made here again by the same people -- Saul Perlmutter and other people. What is going on here -- why is cosmological constant so miserably small? The measure in units using Planckian units is 10 ^ -120. So, why is it so tiny? Here, cosmological constant problem -- attempts to solve it by using anthropic principle goes back to the beginning of inflationary cosmology, when I was trying to solve this problem by using inflation, fluxes, antisymmetric tensor fields, trying to say that the universe could be born in a state with these values of fields, which may mean cosmological constant was this a certain value of a certain field. And, I was trying to say that in only some of these universes one will be able to live. At that time, we did not know that these fluxes are quantized and we did not know that we had the problem of how to, well, make many events into sufficiently many to fine-tune this cosmological constant to zero. There was a paper by Andrei Sakharov, who was at that time in exile in Gorky. And, I was visiting him and we're discussing this stuff and he came up with the idea that maybe our universe may have many different types of compactifying itself. And, because of so many different complicated topologies and so many different combinatorial values -- just maybe, for some of them cosmological constant satisfies anthropic constraints. That's exactly the amazing idea right now. Then, there are some other ideas. All of us were using, without any proof, a constraint that lambda must be smaller than this quantity (10 ^ -120 * M_p^4). Because, if it is larger than this -- and that is in normal language smaller than approximately 10 to 500 times present density of matter in the universe. We were sure that we cannot live in a universe whose density of vacuum (i.e. cosmological constant) is larger than that, because the universe would be torn apart. Or, if the cosmological constant is negative, it would instantly collapse. But, nevertheless, it was necessary to really prove it. Then, Steven Weinberg came to help. And, this constraint [about being less than a certain value] was actually proven and right now there is a group of people who are cleaning it and making it even better. Even with all this cleaning, honestly, we still have some problems of completely cleaning this constraint. But, at least it is reasonably plausible. That was the second step.

We needed, in fact, conditions so that we really have many different vacua. And this was the place where these people came and said that we have a multiplicity of vacua. And then, we came and said that, actually, we know how to stabilize these vacua. And then, we need to understand how to compare probabilities to wind up with certain sets of vacua. And this will be a little bit discussed in the remaining minutes of my talk.

So, this is, at least according to some of the authors, the observed value of the cosmological constant. This green area shows constraints on cosmological constant from anthropic principle. So, it is not completely unreasonable that we're able to see [this area], but you may or may not exactly trust the calculations that bring you this. But, at least it is not totally unreasonable that we live with a cosmological constant of the type that we see at this moment.

There is an additional problem. In addition to cosmological constant, which is a kind of dark energy -- the simplest one -- we have also dark matter. And dark matter constitutes approximately 22% of total matter in universe. And there is approximately five times more of it than there is normal matter. So, why five times more? That's another fine-tuning issue. So, [dark energy] is associated with fine-tuning and [dark matter] is associated with fine-tuning. Why this [specific fine-tuned distribution]?

It is possible to explain this fine-tuning also by using anthropic considerations. I really do not have right now the possibility of explaining it. I am just mentioning that if you study the theory of axion field, well I some times ago had an idea of how we can do it using axion field. And then, pretty recently, Aguirre, Rees, Tegmark, and Wilczek studied it in a model that they gave away.

And with the theory of axion field, under some conditions, you'll find that the expected value -- in a sense this green area -- of the amount of dark matter as compared to amount of normal matter for the theory of axion field and observed value match each other much better than this cosmological constant matches observed data right now. So, in principle, it is possible to explain by anthropic principle all of this cosmic pie. And again, for those who are interested, I can answer your questions about it, but I am afraid I do not have any time to do so, because I want to show you something else.

Assuming that we have so many different universes, then we want to say that this one is ours and we must explain why we live in this part of the universe. Why is cosmology not possible somewhere else or at least why is it not probable? This [photo of many rubber duckies] is amazing for -- you see -- all of them are there. They're very similar to this guy [that is the rubber duckie for our universe]. They're just slightly different. But, if you change electron mass 2x in either direction, life of our type would be impossible. If you change balance of masses between proton and neutron just a little, then life of our type would be impossible. If you change vacuum energy and make it not 10 ^ -120, but a little bit higher, then life of our type would be impossible. So, why and how do we compare? And the problem here is that these models of string landscape scenario require us to compare infinities. Because there are infinitely many red bubbles and blue bubbles and green bubbles -- so there is a problem of richness. We have so much choice and we want to understand why this particular one.

So, there are two different approaches. One approach is to study events at a given point and see what looks most probable at a given point. This is a possible option and many people use it or at least some people do. There is no problem of infinities of this most nasty type. But, then, the answer depends on choice of initial conditions, so that puts some limits on this. There is another possibility, which says that the ones that expand better -- the ones that have bigger volume than most of the others -- then are the ones that we live in. And this possibility -- well, I like it more, but it is at the moment just my preference and preferences are quite subjective. We do not have any way to say that this is the best one. And it also has its own problems. So, we are just learning under what circumstances each of those two approaches is a better choice.

Any of these ways of attacking the problem -- how they treat the cosmological constant problem. The standard question is -- well, we have all these vacua from string theory, but how do we know our vacuum should be at this place? Just take any string vacuum and calculate radiative corrections with the string vacuum. Because string theory is so mysterious and radiative corrections will surely move the position of vacuum state by more than this miniscule thing -- 10 ^ -120 -- then if by chance you are sitting here, then after calculating radiative corrections, you find yourself somewhere here (i.e. far away). So, all of this will be completely unreliable. And then the answer is the same answer that I gave today when I was teaching medical students the kinetic theory of gases -- there are so many particles -- so, we do not care about any particular one -- you care about what is within sample dividers. We have so many different vacua -- perhaps 10 ^ 500 or 10 ^ 1000. So, after these corrections, we look at the total picture and see that this part [inside anthropic constraints] is also populated. And on average, nothing changes after these quantum corrections. So, yes, this gives us some basis for attacking this problem.

If we try to check whether this actually works, then nasty problems emerge. If we consider one of the simplest ways of calculating the probability to live in a state with a different cosmological constant, you find that the probability becomes staggering. One may, despite this huge variety of vacua, say that it is still not enough to say that all vacua are equally populated. Some may be much more populated than others and anthropic considerations may not necessarily work here. There is a different approach which was studied here by Bousso and his collaborators and it gives a smoother distribution of the probability.

Then, recently, there was a paper written by some group at Stanford. One of these people is sitting here, right now. They used my approach to evolve the probability measures. Again, I am not saying that what I am doing is the best thing -- we just really do not know what is this life we live right now. We do not how to compare infinities -- we are just comparing rational numbers and integers. At first glance, there are much more rational numbers than integers -- but then, we know that we can prove they are in a one-to-one correspondence. If we say that we have irrational numbers, then we know that there are much more of them. So, when we are considering infinities here, we are still struggling to come up with a better method. But, let's just make a theoretical experiment and use this pattern. Then, the answer is -- depending on different assumptions on how these vacua are populated -- whether they occur by small chance or by large chance -- in this particular model, one can solve the cosmological constant problem. The probability distribution is very  abysmal, but at least to the best of my understanding of the results of this paper, one of the predictions is that (under simple assumption that one jumps from a vacuum to a neighboring vacuum) our vacuum is very special and one of the special things about it is that it must die approximately in two billion years. So, this is a prediction that we still have a lot of time to test. It is not necessarily a nonsensical prediction, but it is kind of pessimistic. On the other hand, everything depends on the details of the theory and if we assume that jumps down occur via big jumps, which is quite possible, then this prediction disappears and the solution of the cosmological constant remains. So, in this case -- so, depending on the string theory and depending on our understanding of time in that -- so, its physics -- depending on that, in the same measure of probability, we have two distantly different predictions.

I am finishing already -- I have two transparencies to go. One transparency tells you that details of these predictions depend on how we predict. So, we must still learn how to do it properly. And also, they depend on physics -- how one populates the landscape. And the predictions may be dramatically different -- predictions not only w.r.t. the cosmological constant or many other constants there, but also predictions of  our own fate in the landscape independent of that.

And then here, I give you the final conclusions. So, first of all, there is ongoing progress in implementing inflation in supergravity and string theory. It's complicated, thus it requires deep and thorough understanding of string theory, which we are still working on. So, this is a work in progress, but we have some partial progress in this direction. String theory can describe the cosmological constant, but quintessence does not come easily. So, if somebody tells you that here is a model that follows from whatever -- models of quintessence -- be very very careful about this. If you decide to spend your money changing theory of dark energy, spend the money trying to disprove the cosmological constant, not any particular model of dark energy, because we just do not have any. I mean, we have some, but they really do not look nice at the present moment of our understanding. I am not saying this easily -- we tried to do it and so far it just does not come easily. Now, cosmic microwave background prediction can help us to test string theory. If we find gravitational waves, then there will be a prediction of the existing class of models. The prediction will be that gravitino -- well, probably it must be superheavy. Then, scale of supersymmetry breaking -- it is better to have it be big. But, if it is big, then we will have, maybe, a testing of that at LHC, because if we find superpartners at LHC, then there will be a tension in making all of these superpartners with masses of at most 1 TeV. So, there is a potential tension between what -- between string theory and the future results of LHC through the cosmology. So, that's a pretty interesting relation. And finally, looking forward, you see what I am trying to say is -- we do not really have a choice at the moment. Well maybe, some people -- I know some of them -- who are angry at us because we destroyed this real dream of our youth that we will finally find some unified theory which will uniquely explain to us what is the proton mass, what is the electron mass, what is the whatever. We would just have one theory that explains everything. Instead of that, we have right now a mess. We have 10 ^ 1000 different possibilities. And some people hate having this many possibilities. And when they ask me, "How can we live with this?", I say, "What do you want from me?" I came from Russia and we always have one possibility. And right now, I came to the world where there are many possibilities. And what, you want me to send me back? No -- I decline! But, if you love it here, then you must find a way to live with this and find a way to calculate what is probable and what is improbable in our landscape. And that's the end of the story. Thank you.

--

Questions and Answers

1. I want to ask you a question. Early on in your presentation, you showed a map of the microwave background and you said that the sculpture in there was ultimately due to quantum fluctuations. But, quantum fluctuations are a pretty definite thing. When you showed it, there was a little red dot on that map. If someday, somebody has a higher resolution image, will they find details inside of that little red dot? Or, since it is a quantum thing, does it have one value?

AL: What is going on there is first there was COBE map. So, one spot here, another spot here, another spot here -- big spots. Then, WMAP came, and WMAP showed this mosaic of spots -- this became like a Persian carpet. You have many different spots around. Then, this picture from ACBAR came and they do not have a fancy picture, because they just point at some tiny part of sky with a sky beam. You remember this picture that I showed -- this kind of plot and then many, many things (i.e. a curve with a peak and a tail at right ). This was spectrum perturbations. So, what is WMAP saying? They found these first two or three peaks precisely, but we want to know what is going further. So, these further peaks are exactly perturbations at tiny angles. So, when they see these maxima or minima, they see that this red spot in fact has some substructure. Something is a little bit redder, something is a little bit bluer. So yes, there are quantum fluctuations at all scales. That's one of the predictions of inflationary cosmology -- that the perturbations exist at practically all scales up to very tiny scales -- maybe a centimeter or something.

Asker: Even though the diagram showed a couple of big ones and then some little ones, then there was nothing -- it was quiet on the right hand.

AL: Well, that is about seeing big peaks. And that is because there are some special reasons why we do not see as much of the peaks in the sky. And, we do not see these peaks -- well, one of the reasons is that suppose you look at very tiny structure and particles are traveling from one place to another -- then, the particles smear each other. Another reason is that your horizon -- the place from which this radiation is emitted to you -- is not a thin blue line. It actually has some thickness, so you must distinguish this point from this point (i.e. a neighbor), and this also smears the picture. So, there is some limit of resolution that you can achieve by studying CMB -- that is true.

AL: Ask me whether there is any experimental evidence in favor of all these pictures of mountains or is it just bullshit that I am covering up.

2. I have a quick question. Basically, if you knew all the physics that you know today, but you didn't know the fact that you exist, would you predict humanity from physics?

AL: Once again?

Asker: If you knew all the physics that you know today, but you didn't know you existed, would you be able to predict that we would arrive?

AL: Can you repeat once again? I don't know that I exist? No, just a second. I cannot know anything unless I exist.

Asker: Because anthropic principle states that, as you said, to have emergent life, this and this has to be satisfied. But complexity is a complex thing. It's not trivial to say, well these conditions are true. From basic physics, it's really difficult to predict that life would emerge. So, there may be life that continues to today that live in different vacua.

AL: So, here is -- we are going into this dirt which is absolutely necessary for us to go into if we want to clear up our hands in the end. We need to understand exactly what we mean by anthropic principle. There are several definitions. Some of them are very broad. And this broad definition goes -- let's just talk about life. Any kind of life. But there is also a very narrow definition -- and this narrow definition goes like this -- I am an experimentalist and I am thinking about this as an experimentalist. I am making my first experiment as a child. I am looking at my hands. I am looking at my mother. I see that this is soft. Then, I go to school. I learn something about chemistry -- I know there is carbon, hydrogen, whatever. These are my experimental data. On the basis of this experimental data, I want to predict something else -- what? Vacuum energy. Oh my god, this is not yet enough. My carbon and hydrogen is not yet enough. But then, I am learning something about a particular scientist. And yes, we knew about this person about twenty years ago when we still did not know anything about vacuum energy. So, we collect all existing observational data. So now, it becomes less anthropic and more normal. I am just having all experimental data, but including experimental data that involves me being made out of carbon and existing in a galaxy which was born at some particular time, etc. All of this experimental data -- I use all this experimental data without cutting me out. So, this is now okay. I am just taking this fact into account. And then, I see that me as I am -- this is experimental fact -- would be unexplainable if cosmological constant would be large or negative, because our universe would not exist. So, I think that is pretty straightforward.

3. So, can there be experimental evidence for a multiverse?

AL: Yes. This is -- well, you know -- even if people do not ask, that's most of what people usually secretly think. Because, these universes are far away, they will be never found; so why are we even wasting our time on it? So, here's the thing. We should learn a very perverse logic of inflationary theory. Let me give you an example. The answer will take like three minutes, so bear with me. This was the question asked by Zel'dovich, who was head of our cosmology school in Russia. He asked, "Do we have any evidence in favor of the possible non-conservational baryon number?" Everybody knows that, no, we don't have this evidence, because we tried to get it. We took this water, we put it downstairs, we surrounded it by detectors, trying to find out any traces of decay of protons. We found none. So, the normal answer to Zel'dovich's question is, "No, we don't have any experimental data so far in favor of baryon non-conservation." The answer which he would give is the following. And, the answer that I would give would be essentially the same and thus strengthens what he would have said. We would say, "Yes, we know the answer. Yes, we know the evidence. And there is evidence that parallel lines do not intersect." Then, a reasonable answer would be, "Well, now I finally understand that he is crazy." But, here is the logic. Suppose that I want to explain why parallel lines do not intersect. Because, this is experimental fact -- that they do not intersect. And when I go to university, people tell me that they can intersect. In holes of the universe they intersect and if one has a gravitational weighting they intersect. However, I do not see them intersecting. Why? So, the only explanation that we have right now of why they do not intersect is that the universe is flat and that it is flat because of inflation. I really honestly do not any other solutions at the moment. The inflationary universe takes all baryons that existed before inflation, makes their density zero -- i.e. exponentially small. One could not make one man out of all baryons remaining in the observable part of the universe after inflation. So, one must produce them. One can produce baryons without also producing antibaryons only if total baryon number is non-conserved. So, parallel lines not intersecting is experimental verification of the condition that baryon number is non-conserved. If it were conserved, then inflationary theory would be disproved and we would not have an explanation of this experimental fact. So, if we learn this tricky way of thinking, now we are making another step. We have electron mass, which is 2,000x smaller than the mass of a proton. If we make it 2x heavier or 2x lighter, we would be dead. We have proton mass -- if we make it 10% higher than mass of neutron or 10% lower -- we don't even need 10% -- we just need a little -- then all of our nuclei would disappear and we would be dead. If we take gravitational constant and increase it by 100x, we would be dead. If we go from three-dimensional space with one dimension for time to four-dimensional space, then there would be no planetary systems there, because they would be unstable. If we go from three-dimensional space to two-dimensional space, then there would be no planetary systems there, because in two-dimensional space, according to general theory of relativity, there is zero gravitational attraction between far-enough bodies -- that is, those bodies would not be able to stay together. So, three-dimensional space is what we want. And we have so many possibilities in string theory -- so, why three? Here is why we have three dimensions -- anthropic principle. So, we have many such parameters besides cosmological constant. So, we have two choices or maybe three. We are just lucky. There is a miraculous coincidence that we live in a universe that is created in one copy and there is a correspondence between us and all these parameters. These parameters are just matching for us. Or, there is this intelligent design -- someone is seeing and designing the universe for the purpose of creating some special kind of monkey. And then he succeeded, he wa s happy, and here we are. So, do you like this explanation? The only other explanation that I know is that the universe itself made this. It created itself and all of its possible copies. And then, it produces parts where the cosmological constant is different. And it produces parts where electron mass is different and proton mass is different and everything is different. And we can't live there. So, if you want to have a choice, then here you may have a variation that we need for life and in some parts of the universe we have this variation. This is experimental justification of the multiverse. If not for multiverse, I would not have explanation for this mysterious correlation between so many different parameters of our universe.

4. Do you remember your anthropic arguments? For example, you said that there is anthropic support for cosmological constant value. Can that be falsified?

AL: Well, certainly. You can, for example, find that this is not a cosmological constant, but dark energy. And then, when people will find that actually the energy moves just like that -- like a stone, but slowly, like a stone that has 10 billion years to roll down -- we will have a hard time explaining this, because we would not need it.

Asker: But then, what's the point? I was looking at your plot and you said that the cosmological constant has to lie in this range anthropically and, oh look, here's the value of the cosmological constant and it's in there. I'm just wondering, what if it lied in a less probabilistic corner of the diagram. What would you have said then?

AL: This would be interesting. And that's why we're working on it right now and that's why we're fighting with Raphael Bousso and I am coming here -- each of us is trying to do it better. We do not really know which one is the best explanation. We see that with some of these explanations we actually predict -- despite all my words -- a multiplicity of universes. With these explanations, we predict large cosmological constant, because it's overwhelmingly more possible sometimes to live not in anthropic window, but somewhere else. So, we are trying to find a best method of calculating these things. So, maybe we do not only need to choose a theory -- maybe the probability measure is another part of the package. Previously, we thought that  we can use the Lagrangian and this explains everything. Now, maybe we need to have a Lagrangian and also the integration measure. So, we do not know yet. When I say we have cosmological constant explanation, you listen and you smile and you have a good reason for smiling. We are not yet very, very happy. If we were happy, we would not fight with each other. Because, we are trying to do it better -- you see? This is not yet a finished story. It is nevetheless physics. What I am trying to say is it's not -- if you read in the New York Times a few days ago there was a paper by Paul Davies saying this -- that it's just religion and that all physics is just religion and we would be happy without it. We are still trying to do physics.

5. Long before landscape that Leonard Susskind proposed, we had inflationary cosmology and multiverse. What was your original physics and the idea at the origin at the scene of coming up with the multiverse itself at the time that you did that?

AL: Well, the point was this. Before inflationary cosmology was invented, we knew there must be a reason why we see to the right of us and see to the left of us the same thing. After inflationary theory was proposed, we knew that what we see is the result of expansion of a tiny, tiny piece of space. So, how do we know that another tiny piece of space is the same? That was trivial. I mean, you start with some piece of space from the past and this serves as experimental evidence for itself. We have no experimental information about  what is happening after inflation in different parts of the universe. So, if we have no information, why would one think that everywhere stuff must be the same? So, that was just like that. And after that, when we started studying eternal inflation and things like that, we actually have seen some examples where we start with one type of vacuum and then inflation forces us to go to a different type of vacuum.

--


