Title: Elementary Particle Physics: A Personal Look Ahead

Prof. Burton Richter

Physics Department, Stanford University

December 10th, 2007

--

Transcribed on July 18th, 2018.

--

Thank you, Francis. It's a pleasure to be here. And now that it's a pleasure to be here, I have to figure out how to get this thing off and get the next thing on. Ah, don't worry -- we're going to get there. There we go.

We had a very nice reception before this. I observed to Francis that I didn't see any of the young people there. I got a promise that next year at least the post-docs are going to all be invited to the reception. They had very good food, by the way.

I think that now that you have this award for the cyclotron, it might be very useful to show you what a cyclotron looks like. Because, most of you have never seen one. This is the first Lawrence cyclotron. This cyclotron was four inches across. It ushered in a new era in physics. It was built I think in 1930. In the next year, the 11-inch cyclotron was built. It broke the 1 MeV barrier in 1932. It wasn't the first accelerator to reach 1 MeV. The Cockcroft-Walton generator reached it before. But, it was a scalable one and none of the others were.

What you see is a rapid expansion of big-time science as they went first to 16-inch cyclotron (at upper left), then to 184-inch cyclotron (in the middle), and then the cyclotron era ended. It went to a different kind of machine, which I'll say something about in a minute.

Right now, the three biggest cyclotrons in the world are one at the Paul Scherrer Institute in Switzerland, one at Michigan State University (which is a superconducting cyclotron), and one at the University of British Columbia. All of those things are between 500 MeV and 1 GeV and they are all close to 1 MW in beam power.

The cyclotron era ended because cyclotrons were not scalable. If you take a look at a cyclotron, what you have is a magnet and then the particles spiral around and around, gaining energy on each turn and going out and out and out. If you look at how you make these bigger, the mass of the system scales with the cube of the energy. The whole thing's got to get bigger in all dimensions. You saw the 184-inch cyclotron. That clearly couldn't go on and it was replaced with what's in the lower picture -- that's the synchrotron. Where, as the particle energy goes up the magnetic field goes up and everything stays in the same orbit and that scales as the first power of the energy. All you have to do is make the radius bigger as it grows. Interestingly enough, the synchrotron also comes from Berkeley. Ed McMillan here and Veksler in the then Soviet Union are the inventors of the synchrotron. So, maybe there can be a postscript to the plaque and sort of a mini-plaque underneath.

Let me turn now to what I am supposed to be talking about here tonight. I said I was going to give a personal view of what is important to do in particle physics. And if you read the abstract, I started it off with the tale of two cities -- it was the best of times and it was the worst of times. It's the best of times, because particle physics has been turned upside down with the discoveries over the last 15 years. And, I'll talk a little bit about them. It's the worst of times -- at least here in the US -- because all of our big accelerators are shutting down before the next generation of big accelerators is ready to be built. So, the US, which has led the whole business for many, many years is no longer on the frontier. I said also in the abstract that this is a time of tight money and what we have to do are the things that are really important rather than the things that are only really interesting. So, my list of really important is the following. Firstly -- what' s going on in the energy frontier. There's a new one coming on in Switzerland -- the LHC. There's a new one under discussion which is the one for after that and the hope there is that that will be built in the US. There is accelerator R&D, because these accelerators are getting so expensive -- if we don't have some kind of breakthrough that reduces the cost per unit of energy, we are soon going to run out of the ability to afford them and not the ability to build them.

Next on the list is dark matter and dark energy -- what are they? It was only ten years ago that the whole physics world was startled with the supernova probe experiment coming to the conclusion that 75% of the effective mass in our universe was something we knew absolutely nothing about. Part of it was given the name "dark energy" and we still don't know what it is. Then, 20% of it is "dark matter" and we don't know what that is either. And it's only 5% of matter in the universe that is us. That's a little bit humbling to think about -- there's 95% more out there. I don't know what dark matter people look like, but they interact with us only weakly, so perhaps we will never know.

Let me start off with going down a few of these things. I want to start with the biggest machine -- that's the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). It is soon to come on at the CERN laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. I think you can see the outline of the machine going around in the Swiss countryside. There's the Geneva airport over there. This is a 27-kilometer-in-circumference machine. It's a proton-proton colliding beam machine. Colliding beams are what has replaced all the fixed-target experiments in particle physics. Colliding beams give you energies in reaction that relativity says you simply can't get with a beam incident on a particle at rest in a laboratory. So, underneath the Swiss countryside is this 27-km tunnel. It had an electron-positron collider in it -- I'll come to that in a minute -- that was turned off in, I think, early 2000 -- i.e. the magnets were. This 7-and-7 TeV machine was put in there and that machine is nearing turn-on.

Here's a view in the tunnel. You look in the distance and see the gentle curve bending around. Each tube contains two superconducting magnets. The beams are going in opposite directions and are fixed to come into collision at four points around the machine. Not only is the machine huge, but the detector is huge as well.

This is one of the two. This is a detector called ATLAS. And to give you a sense of scale, that's a person standing there. This thing is enormous and so is the other detector which is for some reason called a compact detector, but it's nearly as big as the other one.

This is a scale with ATLAS shown over a six-story building. Now, the person who's the leader of the ATLAS collaboration was a post-doc with me. And he worked with me on the SPEAR colliding beams electron-positron experiments. And, it's sort of interesting to look at the detector that he cut his teeth on in doing his first experiments with colliding beams. ATLAS is bigger than a six-story building and that little thing is a mark-one detector. We did a lot of very nice physics with the mark-one detector.

The LHC is supposed to be completed sometime in the first half of 2008. That will be the completion of installation of the machine and the detectors. In the second half, we will begin full operations to commission the machine and calibrate the detectors. This is all very big and very complicated stuff. I think that it's going to take a little while to get these things settled down and get them running right. And, I have to get rid of a surplus of paper.

If this new machine reaches a few percent of its design intensity, it will find the Higgs boson. You've heard a lot of talk about the Higgs boson in the high-energy physics world. It's supposed to be coupled to the way mass is generated. And this machine does not have to work very well to do that. More complicated things like -- well, David Gross, when he was here, I am sure talked about supersymmetry -- finding out what is beyond our Standard Model is something that is going to take a little bit longer. And they're already beginning to work on an upgrade for that machine to increase its intensity. But, I think we're going to start to see the physics results flowing around 2009. And, we're all looking forward to it.

Now, the other machine I mentioned earlier as part of the really important is an electron-positron collider. Now, why? Well, the proton colliders create things mainly through interactions of components of the proton through the strong force. Electron-positron colliders create things mainly through the electromagnetic and weak forces. It is quite possible that you can see things with electron-positron colliders that you just can't see with the proton colliders. Getting a view of whatever is new from both its strong force manifestations and the electromagnetic and weak force manifestations will tell you a lot more about what is going on.

The work on what's turned into this new machine -- it's got a name -- it's called the International Linear Collider (ILC). It has been going on for a long time. The international effort was started by three lab directors -- Bjorn Wiik at DESY, Hirotaka Sugawara at the Japanese lab KEK, and me at SLAC. And, we started it after the failure of the SSC -- the big superconducting proton machine that was supposed to be built in Texas. The SSC was supposed to be international, but all of the decisions were made in the United States and all the design was done in the US and then people went out and said, "Why don't you come join us and put a lot of money in?" We decided that with that lesson, the right thing to do was start a collaboration and have the collaboration work out what the machine ought to be -- what it should look like.

The target is a collider in the 0.5 to 1 TeV center-of-mass energy range. Why so low, when the proton machine has 7-and-7 TeV? The latter sounds like a lot more. It really isn't, because a proton is a composite particle and the energy is shared among all the constituents of the proton -- the quarks and gluons and such. And for proton machines, one can speak of a mass reach -- how heavy a thing could you find with it. With the first incarnation of the LHC, one will be able to look up the masses of about 1 TeV. And that's how this energy range was chosen. Two approaches were going on in the R&D program. One was for a machine with superconducting RF cavities. Another was for one at room temperature. In 2004, the technology chosen was the superconducting one. We'll live to regret that, but that's another story. An international design effort started and began to focus on a machine called the International Linear Collider (ILC) with energy of 1 TeV.

This is what the International Linear Collider is supposed to look like. We have two long linear accelerators. This is 30 kilometers from end to end. There is one for positrons and there is one for electrons. There is a collision region right here in the middle. These things are the rings where the electron beams and positron beams are generated for the next pulse. We use the spent high-energy beam to generate the next one. We send them down to the beginning and accelerate them again. So, the final baseline is a certain luminosity that we provide, an integrated luminosity which tells us what we are able to do, one big interaction-region hall, and two detectors in a kind of push-pull configuration. So, we have some complementarity in the experimental output.

It's got a schedule. This is the wish schedule of the physics community. This is not the agreed schedule of the governments who have got to put up the money. This baseline configuration -- the schedule was to get that design done in early 2007 -- that's done. Now, they're working on an engineering design to get the details fixed -- that's supposed to be ready at the end of 2009. And then, let's hope that there will be an international agreement to start this project and we hope (we being the US) that this international machine will come out here.

This is a quite expensive operation. Don't get scared by the budget. It's only money, as my wife is fond of saying. Accelerator system -- $6.6 billion. This is in what's called "value method", which is a way to take into account different accounting systems used in Asia, Europe, and the US. It's about what goes into something. So, you can do the accelerator system as essentially purchases -- things made outside, personnel, etc. And now, if you turn it into US accounting by putting in the things on the right-hand side which are not included, we end up with $16 billion. A motion is that the host will pay half of it. This kind of thing is rather expensive. We have joined an international project in thermonuclear fusion -- the ITER project -- which is costed in exactly the same way. The United States knew perfectly well when it took on its share of the value that it would actually cost us twice that. Also, half of $16 billion is less than the cost of the SSC, which we were prepared to do ourselves in 2000, when it was approved.

One of the problems is to get together the international organization that is going to be required to do that. One can have laboratories working together and the laboratories are working together on the design. But, somehow or another, we are going to have to put together some sort of international group that is going to finance this and oversee its construction, and all the rest of that. That is something that needs doing badly. I don't think that can start until 2010. And, the Richter timeline is predicated on the timing of the election. This is a big project and it does not matter who wins -- Republicans or Democrats -- the new administration, for something of this scale, is going to want a complete review all by itself. So, the earliest that that could be done is the end of 2009. And then, if we're lucky, they can put together an international group by 2010. I think that's a little bit aggressive, but anyway it's not totally impossible.

There is a critical issue in all of this. And that critical issue is will 0.5 TeV be enough energy? That depends on what comes out of the LHC. If the LHC finds clues to what's beyond the Standard Model at relatively low energy, this will flop. If it does at relatively high energies -- toward the 1 TeV end of the reach of the LHC -- it will not flop. And it's going to have to be started at a higher energy. Already, there is an effort going on to look at higher-energy machines for the distant future. The technology for a higher-energy machine turns out to be the room-temperature linear accelerators that were rejected for the lower-energy machine, which is why I say it's kind of incredible. And, there is an international group working on high-gradient acceleration, which has already acheived 100 MV / m at RF frequency of 12 GHz. Compare that to the design of the ILC is, which is about 30 MV / m. Then, you can see that the machine is considerably more compact. That does not mean that the machine is a lot cheaper, because there is a lot of stuff to work out and we'll see what happens. But, what will come along in 2010 is a critical decision based on the question of, "Is the ILC energy enough?" If you want me to make a prediction -- I said this would be an opinionated talk -- I think the answer is going to be, "No." I think the higher-energy machine is going to be needed. How we get that higher-energy machine, whether it's the superconducting version expanded or if it is based on the new technology coming along from this high-gradient study, I do not know. So, I said, my bet is for something much beyond the ILC.

We've got to do something about the cost of these machines. Because, we're already talking about $16 billion for this 500 GeV machine. And even if I'm right about the benefits of room-temperature technology, we're going to be talking about that much for a 0.5 TeV machine that uses that technology, too. And, what we need is new accelerator technology. That's come along time and time again. We started off talking about the cyclotron. The cyclotron went on for a while and then reached a point where it wasn't scalable, because the cost went up like the cube of its energy. That got replaced with the synchrotron. The synchrotron cost went up linearly with beam energy. But then, all of them got replaced by colliding beams. Because, if you look at relativity, the reaction energy in a single machine colliding with a target at rest only goes up to square root of energy. So, we went over to colliding beams and took another big jump. We need a jump further now and there's work going on all over. This is just an illustration of some work that was done at SLAC. It's plasma wake-field acceleration and it produced an energy gain of 50 GeV / m. Not MeV per meter, but GeV per meter. So, with that sort of thing, if we're talking about 500 GeV, we're talking about ten meters of accelerator. Is this going to work out? I don't know -- it's early days. There's work also going on at Lawrence Berkeley Lab on laser acceleration. The laser acceleration is a little bit behind in GeV / m, but it's the same sort of orders of magnitude. It's a clear one to two orders of magnitude jump in what one can do per unit cost. The question is can you make the beams stable enough to do colliding beams? Can you make them small enough? Can you make them intense enough? We're going to have to see what goes on in the laboratories. This is an important piece of high-energy physics, because high-energy physics that is accelerator-based is going to come to a screeching halt in 10 or 15 years, running up against a cost barrier. In the proton machine area, people are working on high-temperature superconductors. With high-temperature superconductors, maybe you can get another factor of two or three beyond the LHC, but you're going to run into trouble there, too.

Let me switch gears and talk about dark matter, dark energy, and us. I said that we were all startled -- I was startled -- when I saw Saul Perlmutter give the first talk in 1999 at a lepton/proton conference. I gave the summary talk and I turned aside when I talked about this and I said, "Saul, if I had the money, I'd give you the money for your salary." Because, man, this is very important -- Berkeley is leading the effort for a new satellite to go up and find out something about dark energy. I said already that we are only 5% of the mass of the universe. There's 20 times more stuff out there. We don't know what it is. If you asked the same question only ten years ago, then ordinary matter would have been 20-30% of the universe and dark matter would have been 50%. All of a sudden, there's all this other stuff. It's a big surprise from the supernova search and Saul and the rival group on the east coast have both won prizes for something I think is one of the most important pieces of physics to come along in a long time. So, the 70% was a perfect surprise. The 25% we've known about for some time. We've known about it because certain things are going on that couldn't have happened if the only thing around was ordinary matter. You could look at the velocities of clusters of galaxies -- how are these things going around? Well, they were going around so fast that if it was just the mass that was in the galaxies holding it together, it would not hold together -- everything would fly apart. There had to be more mass than we could see. The rotation curves of stars in galaxies were showing the same problem. People began to think the weakly-interacting massive particles (WIMP's) were responsible, but people have looked for them and have not found them. We don't know what they are and we don't know what the masses of these things are. The one thing we know is that they have weak interactions with ordinary matter.

To me, this is one of the most dramatic pictures I've ever seen in astronomy. What you're seeing is the collision of two clusters of galaxies. And there are three figures superimposed here. One is visible light from Hubble space telescope. Blue is distribution of mass from gravitational lensing. Pinkish-red stuff is X-rays from Chandra satellite. And what's going on here is that these two clusters are passing through each other. The ordinary matter has electromagnetic interactions as well as gravitational. It exerts a drag and it slows the ordinary matter down and heats it up so that it emits X-rays. The dark matter keeps on racing along and the two things are getting separated. If we wait long enough, the dark matter is eventually going to suck the ordinary matter back in. But for now, that picture, I think, is the most dramatic picture showing the existence of this dark matter.

There are a lot of other things that have gone on in astroparticle physics and cosmology. The famous WMAP data -- the predecessor of WMAP that was baby WMAP got George Smoot his well-deserved Nobel prize this last year -- is shown here. This is the most perfect black-body spectrum anybody has ever seen, as far as I know. The second peak here is the first thing that was predicted by this inflation scenario. Because, the universe went through a period of very rapid expansion when it was very young. There was no real evidence for that until this data showed up. And this was a prediction that was made before the data came in. I'm a little suspicious of postdictions, but I really like predictions. And the predictions were done.

The supernova experiment is absolutely terrific. This is Richter's part two of how the supernova experiment works. We get a binary system with a companion star and a white dwarf. Matter spills out of binary one and spirals around and eventually falls in. Over time, the mass of the white dwarf begins to go up until it reaches a threshold of 1.4 solar masses, at which point it goes boom and turns into a supernova. Because it all goes up very slowly, when you reach the threshold, it is all supposed to go off at the same mass and become a standard candle. It's absolutely terrific and the results are shown here. What you see is a deviation from two measures of intensity -- one is shown in red chip (that's the Hubble distance) -- one shows absolute intensity and you get 1 / (r ^ 2) (that's a different distance). And you can ask from the two of them are they consistent with a universe that's in uniform expansion. And the answer is no -- you have to say that expansion of the universe is speeding up. Sorting this out is, I think, one of the most important experiments to be done in particle physics. Note that particle physics is a field that subsumes other fields. It's got a variable threshold -- particle physics is whatever you can do with the highest energy you find and particle physics is whatever you can do to understand the very small and the very large. So, Francis, you know about your role in particle physics, but that's what you're doing.

What's coming next in this field of astroparticle cosmology? A new satellite GLAST for high-energy gamma rays is supposed to go up next May. Thank god it is not on the shuttle -- it's on a free-flier, so we only have to worry that the Department of Defense steals our rocket to launch a spy satellite. But, that doesn't look likely. PLANCK is a next-generation satellite; the sequence is COBE, WMAP, and then PLANCK. It's the next generation in cosmic ray and microwave background observer. It's also going to look at polarization. And polarization of the microwave background can tell you a lot about the early universe. Then, we have the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST), a ground-based telescope of a special kind that's good for gravitational lensing and that can contribute to understanding the dark energy thing. Then, there is something called Joint Dark Energy Mission (JDEM) that is an extended supernova search. Joint means it's supposed to be a DOE/NASA thing. GLAST was the first DOE/NASA collaboration. One of the things I am proud of is that I sold it to both of them. It was the first time that DOE and NASA had ever done anything together. Joint Dark Energy Mission has been given the highest priority for the so-called Beyond Einstein probe by recent National Academy study. There's going to be an "announcement of opportunity" the way that NASA likes to put it. They'll say that there's an opportunity to do something for studying dark energy and that people should send in their proposals. Berkeley has the lead with a project called SNAP. They've been working on it for a long time and I think that they're going to end up winning. And if they don't win, it's all their own fault, because they certainly have had more time to think about it. Anyway. I hope that it all ends well.

Neutrinos. I want to mention a little bit about neutrinos. It's a hot topic that started in the 1990's. We know that there are three kinds of neutrinos -- we've known that for a long time. Neutrinos have mass -- we didn't know that. Twenty years ago, we did not have a clue that neutrinos had mass. The Standard Model of particle physics has no mechanism for a neutrino mass. You can have neutrino masses, but you've got to paste something extra onto the Standard Model. And there's a lot of argument about what that is. So, what we found out is that neutrinos have mass. Also, they can change identity -- i.e. type A can turn into type B can turn into type C and can go back and forth -- and Ray Davis and Masitoshi Koshiba shared the 2002 Nobel prize for this discovery.

This is Ray Davis in the home state of mine with his 100,000-gallon container of cleaning fluid. It's a remarkable experiment. It's full of chlorine. Neutrinos can interact with chlorine and turn an atom of chlorine into an atom of argon. And once a month, Ray Davis would filter all of this stuff and look for, I think, five atoms of argon out of 10 ^ 27 atoms of chlorine. And he didn't find enough. And one of the problems was that if there was any inefficiency in his extraction of argon, there wouldn't be enough -- there would be a neutrino deficit from inefficiencies. So, was his neutrino deficit real or not? It took a couple of other experiments to confirm it.

This is a detector called Super-Kamiokande. It is 50,000 cubic meters of water. It is a huge, enormous thing. What you see here is it partly full and you see experimenters going around in their rubber boats getting all of the photomultipliers lining the walls plugged in and connected up as they fill the thing. I think this is really quite something. It's a very dramatic picture. I sort of love that one. From the experiments done with Super-Kamiokande's predecessor and Super-Kamiokande itself, the cosmic ray muon neutrino was found to be able to change into something else. Electron neutrinos were disappearing somehow from Ray Davis' work and now you knew that the muon neutrinos were disappearing, too. And this has led to an explosion of effort at accelerators, with reactors underground, with radioactive decay. And there are a couple of experiments coming along that, I think, are going to be very important. There is one recent one I think was a disappointment, but I may be discreet and not talk about that.

I borrowed this slide from Freedman. He chaired the Committee on the Future of Neutrinos and I love it. "Given the appropriate resources, the future of neutrino physics looks bright indeed!" While I have to say is that those trunks aren't big enough for the future of accelerator-based high-energy physics, but they're plenty big enough for neutrinos.

A thing I think is one of the most important experiments coming along is a reactor experiment. It is being done in China, of all places. This is Daya Bay. When this thing comes on, there will be three big reactors running and the notion here is to look at the way those neutrinos interact in a detector and to look at the number of events of various types. What's being looked for here is a parameter which doesn't mean anything to you -- it's called theta_{1,3}. It's a very critical parameter, because if it's too small, it becomes impossible to do CP-violation in the neutrino sector. All we know about theta_{1,3} from existing experiments now is that sin^2(2 * theta_{1,3}) < 0.1. If it's less than 0.01, which is in the reach of the Daya Bay experiment, I don't think we will ever see CP-violation in the neutrino sector.

Another experiment that is very important I don't have a good picture of is to answer the question of, "Is the neutrino its own antiparticle?" Is it a Dirac or Majorana particle? That's an underground experiment. There are two competitors doing prototypes. And those competitors are going to each have a -- I think it's a few-percent scale -- detector built and running next year. And then we'll see what the backgrounds really are for each of them and which one should be scaled up all the way.

The one I'm disappointed in is the one called MiniBooNE. There was an experiment done at Los Alamos ten years ago. That experiment implied that maybe there is a fourth kind of neutrino. And that kind of neutrino has different interactions. Their results sat there. I never believed it and I had very particular reasons why I thought that experiment was wrong. MiniBooNE was done to show what happened -- and I said this was an opinionated talk, so I will give you my opinion of it. What you see here is the number of events that they had compared to what the model said they should have. If you look at the low energy, you see that the real of events are much bigger than for the model. Although they claim to be doing what's called a blind analysis, where they wouldn't do anything with the results until all the data was in -- by the way, I think that's a very poor argument, too -- when it turned out this way, they changed the energy range that they would use to the energy above the dashed line. The probability that the data that is there fit with any of their hypotheses was less than 1%. So, they changed the cut on energy to make it better. But then comes another problem. Most people who do statistics don't really recognize that if the fit is too good that there is something wrong with your experiment. After they did their cut, what they did is they look to see whether there was this other kind of neutrino and the answer is zero? But, the data is so good that it also only has about 1% probability of being right. And I don't see how one experiment that's based on two 1% probability distributions can say anything about whether the basic thing -- the basic LSND experiment -- is right or wrong. As I told you earlier, I believe it is wrong.

I think it's time to bring this to an end. And I want to bring it to an end with a picture. This is a picture looking toward the center of the Milky Way. The little white dashed line is an airplane going overhead. The shadows in the lower left and the lower right are trees. Why do I show this? Well, I have to think back to how I got into physics. When I was growing up, it was dark outside, not the way it is now. And when it was dark outside, you could look up into the sky and you could see the galaxies, you could see the Milky Way, you could see this banded diamond headed across the sky. It was fascinating and that's what got me to think that what I wanted to do when I grew up was to find out how the universe worked. So, I've made my contributions to help find out some of the things about how it's going to work. But, there's still a lot more to find out and I wish that young people today could look and see what I saw with my own eyes. You can't do that, but I hope you look at pictures like this one and say, "I want to help find out what makes the universe work." Thank you all.

ends at 59:05

--

Questions and Answers

1. I want to ask two naive questions. The first one is -- the linear accelerators were made to avoid Cherenkov radiation from going in a circle. But then, after they built the linear accelerator, they store the particles in a circle at the end of the machine, anyway, at Stanford. So, it seems to defeat the purpose of making it a straight line. Then, I noticed the new accelerator is back to a straight line, again. That seems like a contradiction. The other question is -- why is the picture of Segre an empty circle?

BR: Well, I actually have one of Emilio's last books on my desk. It's a book he wrote about the great classical physicists. I should have snatched a picture from it and put it in for the start of the Segre lecture, but I didn't.

BR: As far as the other thing goes, you're not looking at the relative energy. What has happened is the SLAC linear accelerators can produce a beam that's 60 billion eV. You can't put that in something that is much smaller than that LHC machine that is ~20 km around. What was done very early is on the storage ring I built to do physics with some of my distinguished colleagues here -- Chenowsky and such. Some people came up to me and said, "We're going to revolutionize condensed matter physics if you will let those blasted X-rays out." So, we built them upward and we let the X-rays out. And what you have is all the synchrotron light sources -- the SLAC source is the first of the modern light sources. It has done just what they promised and it revolutionized condensed matter physics, molecular biology, structural biology; and it's being used in environmental science. And what was a plague to particle physicists is gold dust to the synchrotron designers. So, it's a really nice outcome.

Moderator: I have to comment on the empty face that you saw. I will introduce my speculation as to why we have that empty face. It's honoring Segre, but it's also pointing to the future and all the possible future Nobel prize winners that we are going to have.

BR: Terrific. That's why she's chairman of the department. I think you've got to put her on the Chancellor's list, too.

2. The way I understand it -- and I'd be delighted to be corrected -- that when they did the experiment with the supernova class 1A -- comparing its red-shift with its apparent brightness or its intrinsic brightness -- there was a disparity. And out of that disparity, suddenly we have an accelerating universe. Why didn't they first consider that perhaps not all red-shifts are cosmological or is there something wrong with our conception of a standard candle? I just want to know how we are so sure -- no, I want you to explain why are you so sure our universe is accelerating?

BR: This is not really my bag. I can tell you, though, that there was a considerable amount of skepticism about the standardness of the standard candle. There was a lot of work done by a lot of people. The biggest question was about dust. Was there dust that is absorbing the light? Because, if there was, it would dim light and you'd get the wrong answer for the brightness. That went on for several years and the experts in the business finally concluded that that could not be it. So, with a big amount of work, we came to the conclusion that it was standard enough. The deviations are sufficiently large, so it doesn't have to be perfect. Then, the next experiment is supposed to be able to look to much bigger distances -- much higher z's -- where the deviation will be still larger. And then, maybe we'll be able to make some quantitative statement about what's going on. If the answer comes out a certain way, then Einstein's cosmological constant is consistent with what we're seeing. If the answer is different from that, then it's got to be something else. From what we know now, it's pretty close to the answer the cosmological constant would give. But, the error bars are still big enough that the meaning is still inconclusive.

3. Do you think the LHC will find proof of the Higgs boson and supersymmetric particles?

BR: If there's a Higgs boson there at an accessible mass range -- that's up to a few hundred GeV -- that's the range that most of the theorists say it has to be in -- I think they'll find that no later than a year or so after the machine turns on. Just because its luminosity is so enormous. As I said, it only has to work at a few percent. I think that supersymmetry is one of the silliest ideas ever. Supersymmetry to solve two little problems in particle physics puts together a theory with 124 new arbitrary constants. That's not the way we make progress in science up until now. We try and reduce the number of constants. Sometimes, we have to increase them. You know, when the Greeks thought there were only four elements and we had to run up the number of elements. People didn't think that there was a weak force or a strong force until this -- until the 20th century. So, we had to increase those two. But, it just seems that that would be a little too gross. If you want another thing that I think is really one of the silliest things ever, it's the landscape. I talk to the string theorists in the following way. I say that they have three years. They say, "Why three years?" And I say that string theory was invented 37 years ago and Moses led the Israelites in the desert for 40 years. You've got three years. The landscape is empty of any predictive ability. The landscape says that there are, I think, e ^ 200 possible solutions to string theory and that they are all equally probable. And, I said to them, "Look, give me a little help. You don't have to pick out the right one, but show me a correlation. Show me that if the electromagnetic coupling constant is anywhere around where it is as we see it that the weak coupling constant is also someplace around where we see it." Is there a ridge in your landscape? The answer I've got is, "We don't know and we don't know how to tell." I think what we need is experiments. I'm hoping for some real excitement for the LHC. I don't know what's going to come out. I would love the most oddball solution, which is micro black holes that, say, are from other dimensions. I think that would be really neat.

4. I have two quick questions. Firstly, why are you shutting down you -- SLAC -- and Fermilab at the same time? Secondly, what is the probability that the International Linear Collider comes to this country?

BR: The first question has to do with money. And, it has to do with what kind of progress you can make with a machine. An accelerator has got what I call a "natural data doubling time". If you're going to make something significant happen, you really need to reduce your error bars by a factor. That's the data doubling time. The B-factory at SLAC and the machine at Fermilab are shutting down for somewhat different but related reasons. The B-factory data doubling time has gotten to be so long that without a major upgrade to increase its luminosity by a factor of ten, there is no point in going on with it. Fermilab is facing pressure from the LHC. And anything you can find at Fermilab you can find at the LHC. And because the LHC has both more energy and 100x the designed luminosity, it doesn't take very long to do it. So, you needed something new at Fermilab, too. The thing that is sort of regrettable is that we are so slow on the linear collider that we're not already doing it. Now, will it come to the US? I think what you're asking really is what I call a political science question, not a science question. It is not so expensive that we can't afford it. We certainly could afford it. When the time comes to make these decisions, will we want to afford it? Beats me. It depends on who is president. Now, I don't know what Mrs. Clinton thinks, but President Obama comes from the state where the ILC might be built. So, if you want to bet, then you might want to bet on that one. But, when it comes down to it, there has not been the resources to do the kinds of upgrades needed at those laboratories to keep the US accelerator program on the frontier. Interestingly enough, the US advanced accelerator program is probably the leading program in the world. You take SLAC, what goes on here, what goes on at some of the other laboratories where there are electron machines -- and those are the leading programs in the world. If we actually pull off an effective 50 GeV per meter technology, it will be because of the work that's going on in the US. As long as they keep funding that. But, at least that's relatively cheap.

5. What do you think about the idea that dark matter is made of hadrinos?

BR: Hadrinos come and hadrinos go. I don't know what they are right now. The theorists are so good at inventing new things. One of the problems that theorists have lived with since the mid-70's is the lack of any data saying where they should be going. The only thing that's disagreed with the Standard Model is the neutrino isolation and I think that one wouldn't call the acceleration of the expansion a disagreement with the Standard Model, because that model never had anything to do with gravity, anyway. So, I don't know what a hadrino would do. But, I could give you a list of things that they are inventing that might or might not be at LHC -- I hope that the LHC does find them, though. I ducked your question.

6. Is there any role for non-accelerator-based high-energy physics, like cosmic ray experiments?

BR: Sure. I thought I gave you on my list -- everything except the first was non-accelerator-based. I talked about experiments in space, experiments in reactors, experiments that are underground. The non-accelerator-based high-energy physics program is alive and flourishing. There is a huge amount to do. The problem in particle physics -- I'm calling it particle physics, now -- is a problem with the accelerator-based program. The accelerators have been the driving force in deepening our understanding up until relatively recently. And now, they have reached a point where they are simply so expensive that it's hard to get the next one built. But, there are lots of things being done and there are lots of things going on here and up on the hill and at SLAC and at other places that are non-accelerator-based particle physics.

7. What's your opinion of what will come out of these experiments where a couple of heavy nuclei are smashed together in order to look at the quark gluon plasma -- I've seen some articles on that recently and I have some colleagues who actually are working on that.

BR: I haven't paid a lot of attention, actually, to what they're going to find out about it. I think they're going to find out more about the distribution and interaction of the partons that make up the protons and neutrons. I don't think they're going to be pushing on into what's going on at still smaller distances or still higher energies. That could turn out to be wrong. Some of the people claim that the information that they get from these collisions is critical to understanding some of the things that are going on at the LHC. But, I haven't really studied it and I can't give you any educated answer.

--


