Title: How I Became A Quant: Financial engineers give a personal view of their careers in quantitative finance

Berkeley Haas MFE

March 1st, 2017

--

Transcribed on July 21st, 2018.

--

Host: Janet Chin
Moderator: Andrew Alden
RA: Rajat Agrawal
MC: Maggie Chen
KC: Kevin Coldiron
LO: Louis Odette
MR: Mike Ryerson
EV: Emmanuel Vallod

A1, A2, A3, A4 - audience members

--

Host: My name is Janet Chin. I'm the caeer specialist for the Berkeley Master of Financial Engineering program -- the MFE. So, the MFE is a quantitative finance program, but we're also tackling data analytics and data science and we place our students in fintech technology terms including Google and Lending Club, as well as in financial institutions such as Citi, BlackRock, and more. We're very excited to host this annual event and we welcome you again. I work with our executive director Linda Kreitzman, who couldn't join us tonight but who extends her warmest welcomes to you, as well. The MFE launched in the summer of 2000. To date, we have graduated 15 classes. Our 16th class will be graduating in just two short weeks. We have some of our current students, as well. So, you'll have an opportunity to speak with them and of course our panelists. Without further ado, let me introduce to you -- actually, I have to mention that this event is made possible with sponsorship from the IAQF, the International Association of Quantitative Finance -- we thank them for their partnership. They represent MFE programs across the US and you can find more information about them on that pamphlet. I'd like to introduce to you Andrew Alden -- he is one of our many alums. He graduated in 2013 and he is currently with WeatherStorm Capital. He will lead us tonight as a moderator. So, please welcome Andrew as well as all of our panelists.

Moderator: Alright, thank you very much for the introduction. My name is Andrew Alden. I am currently head of quantitative research at two firms -- WeatherStorm Capital and Vident Financial. They're both essentially owned by the same people, so that's why I have two titles. At my company, I research, design, and build quantitative equity strategies. In plain English, I pick stocks and build portfolios. A lot of my job day-to-day consists of downloading data, processing data, doing research to look for signals that drive stock returns, and ultimately finding ways to combine those signals, optimize a portfolio, and deliver it in an index, so that an ETF can track it. So, my firm is an ETF firm. You're obviously very familiar with BlackRock, I assume, who has gazillions of ETF's. The direction that industry is going in is to deliver what are known as multi-factor or smart-beta portfolios or ETF's that are designed to do a lot of the thinking that an active manager would do, but that also do it in a systematic way to deliver returns for the investors. So, that's a little bit about what I do. And, since this event is called "How I Became A Quant", I'll also tell you a little bit about my path to get here. So, about ten years ago, I came out of undergrad with an economics and finance degree and I moved to the Bay Area and wanted a great career in finance. Basically, I got a job watching other people do cool stuff. So, I got an entry-level job. Essentially, I was processing the trades that hedge funds were doing, so I got to see a whole bunch of different hedge funds and what they were doing, what trades they were putting on, stuff like that. But, everything I did was watching cool people do interesting things without doing it myself. So, a couple of interesting things during that time were the following. Firstly, if you're familiar with The Big Short and Michael Burry at Scion Capital -- he was played by Christian Bale in a movie -- he was one of my clients; so, I was watching his trades and I was watching everyone else lose a ton of money and he made a whole bunch of money and then closed his fund down. Secondly, a cool thing that happened at that time was Kevin's firm was also one of my clients, so I watched his cool trades and worked with that portfolio for about a year. At about that time, I was really trying to think about, "How can I do the interesting stuff, how can I pick the stocks, how can I build the portfolios?" And I essentially realized I really needed a lot more skills. And one of the reasons why I like doing this event is that at about that time, I happened to be in a bookstore in New York, and I saw a book called "How I Became A Quant". It was a lot of -- I don't know if some of you have seen the book -- but, it was a lot of hedge fund managers, people in finance, etc. who were telling their stories about how they usually started off in science or started off in other fields and found their way into quantitative finance and had a great career. So, that was pretty inspirational to me, so I enjoy coming back and moderating this event -- this is now the second time. For that reason, it kind of ties into my own personal story. So, after a while, I did realize that I needed to get the skills to do the cool stuff, so I looked at the MFE program here and applied. Thankfully for me, even though my background was economics and finance, I had also done a bunch of programming, stats, math, and sciences, because I had thought about doing a couple of different things. So, I had the background that made it relatively straightforward to apply to this program and go this route. So, out of MFE, I more or less got straight into what I'm doing now and that's been great. Developing those quantitative skills was critical for the path I took to getting to do the interesting stuff in finance that I very much enjoy doing today. So, at this point, I'd like to turn it over to all of our panelists. Instead of introducing each of you, I would love to have you each introduce yourself. Tell us where you work, what you do, and a little bit about your path to get there. So, Rajat, do you want to start us off?

RA: Sure. Is this on? So, hi. I am Rajat Agrawal. I work at Lending Club as a senior director in the investor group, focusing on capital market structuring and investor analytics. My path has been that I started my career in finance at Deutsche Bank in the rates analytics team doing quantitative modeling for interest rate trading desk, building some quantitative strategies and portfolio monitoring for our hedge fund clients. I saw a lot of the things that quantitative finance people do, but I didn't have a solid understanding of what's going on or how the models actually work. So, I tried to pursue a financial engineering degree from Berkeley to get a sense of all the basic understanding of quantitative finance. After that, I went on to pursue an opportunity at Goldman in their investment banking division. It was a new group that they were setting up for advising financial institution clients on derivative structuring and a few other balance sheet optimization strategies. So, I immediately put my MFE degree to good use there. It was a great experience for five years. And then, I saw a trend developing. With so many revolutions coming in -- specifically, with the new fintech space arriving -- Lending Club appeared to be a great opportunity for me to pursue in the credit space. It linked well with my background, so I decided to pursue an opportunity at Lending Club. That's in short about me.

MC: Hi, everyone. My name is Maggie. Currently, I work on product analytics at Google -- so, I work for Google Photos. It's a really new product. It's been around for two years. Since I graduated in 2015, to a larger extent, It feels like I'm working at a start-up. It's really disorganized, as you would not imagine would happen at Google. So, my path to where I am right now is kind of different and unconventional -- I am not saying you should follow it. So, I started my career in finance in a way similar to what Andrew mentioned. I watched all the cool hedge fund strategies. I worked on investor performance analytics at Canadian Pension Plan investment board about four years ago. So, I worked on their external fund. Basically, it's a funnel hedge fund for the pension plan. I was always wondering what's behind the strategy. Since I studied mathematics and statistics for my undergrad, I was always wondering why the performance goes a certain way or why the investment strategy was constructed a certain way. My experience at CPPIB kind of led me to pursue a financial engineering degree at Berkeley. When I was at Berkeley, maybe unlike most other people, I came in with a really open mindset -- I wanted to learn and explore. I didn't really set my mind to quant finance. So, at Berkeley, I not only took classes offered by Haas, but also I went to listen to some of the statistics and economics courses. Later on, I became really good friends with a economics PhD student here who later on introduced me to something called data science. After my internship at BlackRock, I decided to give it a try. So, I landed my first job after MFE at Twitter as a data scientist. At there, I learned a ton and worked with a lot of social media data and worked with project managers who opened my eyes to what I can do with my quantitative background. Later on, I didn't plan to change my career, but I started at Google about three months ago working on photos. Right now, my day-to-day job is really focused on user behavior. What that really means is that you look at -- it's really product-driven -- you look at what the users do with the product based on individual data. Then, you aggregate the data using some machine learning algorithm to cluster it and tell what kind of user it is. Based on the aggregate data, you can extract some insight about the product and later on to feed our product roadmap. So, yeah. I'll pass it on to Kevin.

KC: I'm a little nervous now, because Andrew's seen my trades and I think Maggie may have seen our pitch, when we used to pitch to CPPIB. So, I have to be careful about what I say here. As you can tell, I do a lot of things. So many things that you can barely fit all my jobs on my name card. I do really two things right now. I teach a course in dynamic asset management here on the MFE program. Then, I have a consultancy that I just started where what I do is help non-quantitative institutional investors bring quantitative techniques into their investment process. In terms of how I got started in the business, it really was in the early 1990's that I did an MBA at London Business School. During the MBA, you were allowed to take part in the PhD seminars. So, I took part in those and that was quite unusual for an MBA student at that time. And I just really loved the rigor and detail of the research process that was coming up in these academic papers. And there were a lot of papers that we read that were suggesting there were these market inefficiencies that could be exploited. When I got out of my MBA program in London, I got hired by Barclay's and they had a tiny quantitative research group that was trying to do some of this stuff. Basically, building models to forecast equity and bond returns or stock returns. And, I ended up working in that group and running the team. And, we had a really successful stock selection team that was essentially running what are now called smart-beta portfolios. I wish we had come up with the name smart-beta back then, because then I could have retired a little earlier. But, it was early stages -- very few people were using quantitative tools to run equity portfolios in those days. So, I did that for a number of years. That was all in a long-only sense. What I eventually realized is that we were really only putting kind of half the model to use. We had all this information about stocks that were going to go down in price and we weren't able to take advantage of that. So, I kind of lobbied the CEO at the time, Blake Grossman, and said, you know, I think we could start a hedge fund business here and take advantage of the model's forecasting power on the short side. So, he allowed me to go ahead and set up a hedge fund at Barclay's. I sort of got lucky in that noone wanted to help me. Barclay's had tried to set up a hedge fund in San Francisco in 1996 and it kind of lasted for a year or two and then blew up. So, people were really nervous. They didn't want to be associated with what seemed like a risky product at the time. So, this is like the late 1990's. Institutional investors weren't running hedge funds. I say lucky, because that meant that I kind of had to do everything myself. I had to do the modeling, the portfolio management, even go out and raise the money. That experience helped me when I left in 2002 and set up my own firm with a Berkeley grad called Peter Algert, who was working for Barclay's in San Francisco. So, the two of us set up a firm in San Francisco in 2002 called Algert-Coldiron Investors. We did quant equity -- both hedge funds are long-only-primarily hedge funds -- so, it was global equity stock selection, market-neutral long/short, typically levered anywhere from 2-6 times the side, depending on the product. So, Peter and I worked together until 2014, when I sold my half of the business to him and took some time off and more recently, like I said, I started teaching and started advising some non-quantitative clients on ways they can import quantitative techniques into their process.

LO: I'm Louis Odette. I'm in the research department at Citi. What we do in research is publish reports, send them out to the firm's clients and try to help to inform their investment processes as part of the services that the firm offers to trading clients. I've got two areas of coverage within that mandate. One is US small and mid cap equity strategy -- so, a little bit more of a traditional role there. We try to put out forecasts for market direction and suggest whether investors should be biased towards growth or value stocks, which sectors they should overweight or underweight in their portfolio, and maintain a focused list of individual stocks that our fundamental analysts cover, as well. The second area of coverage is exchange-traded funds, so that sort of syncs up with what Andrew does. That is a pretty wide-open space. We're one of the first teams on the street to cover ETF's from research. So, there we look at a variety of things -- we monitor flow trends, product launches, closures, any regulatory developments (since the regulatory framework around ETF's is still developing, since they are a relatively new product in finance). We also look for information that we can extract from ETF data that may be relevant to investors in the broader asset classes that the ETF's track. As far as how I got to where I am today, for undergrad I went to Dartmouth with an economics major and math minor. Following graduation, I worked in mergers and acquisitions consulting. I really enjoyed that work, but then I realized that there was this whole area in finance out there where I could put my quantitative skills to more direct use. So, I looked into graduate programs, enrolled here in the MFE program at Berkeley. Following graduation, I went and worked for Moody's for a couple years modeling mortgage-backed securities. I graduated in 2009, so this was the aftermath of the financial crisis. Moody's had a software tool that had been predominately used by people structuring mortage-backs. They were trying to repurpose it for investors to do portfolio surveillance and risk analytics. As part of that initiative, they had to build out a library of waterfall models for all the mortgage-backed securities deals that were outstanding at that point. So, I was involved in that effort. Also, I was involved in some customization work and implementation on the client side. I was there about two years and then I moved over to Citi and I've been there for a little over six years now.

MR: Hi, I'm Mike Ryerson. I am a senior researcher at a hedge fund here in Berkeley called The Voleon Group. It was founded by a Berkeley stats professor named Jon McAuliffe around 2007. I joined about a year ago. We use machine learning and data science to develop systematic trading strategies for global financial instruments and manage those strategies on behalf of our clients. In terms of background and how I got here, I feel like I have one degree of separation from pretty much everyone on this table. I was a math and computer science undergrad at Duke, not Dartmouth. My wife went to Dartmouth -- maybe that's our connection [involving Odette]. I wound up getting my PhD in finance at an undisclosed institution to the south of this campus. At the end of that time, I was wrapping up a dissertation and realized that I wanted to go into industry instead of academia. I found myself as a statistical arbitrage trader for Citi -- another connection [involving Odette] -- for a couple of years in New York. Then, I moved back out to the west coast to join Barclay's Global Investors -- missing my colleague [Coldiron] here by about two years. There, I worked in fixed-income research developing trading strategies for interest rate products. BGI was eventually acquired by BlackRock. During my time at BGI, we launched a fixed-income quant hedge fund. I eventually was in charge of running research for that fund, which grew to be the largest hedge fund under the BlackRock umbrella. Between BGI and BlackRock, it was about 10 years in those roles. Then, I got excited about machine learning, I got excited about data science. I thought that there was enormous potential and opportunity for that area of research and work to transform what quant finance was. The marketing and advertising people were way ahead of us at leveraging that stuff. So, I got to know the folks at Voleon and I thought it would be fun to try working for a small institution for a change. I've been there for about the last year.

EV: I'm Emmanuel. I'm a senior researcher at BlackRock. Mike and I worked together for a few years. There, I  cover systematic strategies for hedge fund long-only institutional and long-only retail products in securitized credit and mortgage-backed securities. The way I got into there is actually very brief. I spent too many years of my life in school. Then, I realized that I had no clue what to do with it. So, I decided to move to the US where I started being a bit more pragmatic in terms of actually being able to do a job. My first experience with finance was actually my internship in MFE. I went to a prop trading desk at New York covering a wide array of products. I really liked it. I subsequently got another job at another prop trading desk in New York trading the same products I cover now but that are very fundamental in nature. I realized that we were fundamentally speaking different languages between my former boss and myself -- I mean, besides my terrible accent. So, I figured it was probably time for me to go back to doing some more math on how we think about the investment process, how we design solutions, and effectively how we think about generating more money for the customer. That's how I got into it. Very brief.

Moderator: Great. One thing I'm thinking might be helpful to everyone here is -- perhaps, you can talk each talk us through what your day looks like. What are the things you do? When you walk in in the morning, what's the first thing you do? How does a typical day play out? Is the job high-stress? Is it tons of pressure? Is everyone competing? Help paint a picture of what life at work is like as a quant.

RA: Sure. So, before I tell a description of my day at work, I just wanted to give an overview of what Lending Club does. Some of you may have heard of the term "fintech". There's a lot of innovation going on in the financial space. If you think about a traditional bank's business model, they originate loans, and the way they fund the loans is through deposits. So, you as a depositor deposit money in the bank and you get 10-20 basis points on your money, while the bank goes and lends it out at 3, 4, 5 percent up to 10-20 percent in the case of credit cards. That spread goes to the bank and they are still able to make money, even though they have been traditionally very inefficient using brick-and-mortar process and are heavily regulated. They are still able to make money, because though the spreads weren't too tight. What Lending Club saw was that there is definitely some inefficiency here. We created this online marketplace where we can match the people who want to lend money to the people who want to borrow money. It's a little bit different, because deposits are completely safe, whereas with Lending Club, investors end up taking the credit risk of the borrowers. But, essentially, you are making higher returns, also. So, it's a product that fits to some investors and some borrowers also like it because of the efficiency of the online process. So, what my role there is is -- I am part of the investor group. As you might have imagined, since Lending Club is not a bank, it does not have access to stable capital, like with deposits. We try to diversify our sources of funding. We have a retail channel, where retail investors invest into our loans. We have institutional investors -- banks -- also buying through our platform. And we access capital markets. Capital markets is a wholesale way of getting funding. So, we can actually raise some debt against these loans that we have issued securitized by these loans. This is a way of getting wholesale funding in the market. So, what I do at Lending Club is support the securitization business. We are planning to come up with a series of securitization deals in the market every quarter. My goal is multiple-folds -- (a) monitor the capital markets -- what's going on in the capital market space, who are the players who are coming out with deals, what are the deals looking like,  what has been the investor reaction or response to those deals, how are those deals performing -- (b) I work with rating agencies, because it's very important to get these deals rated, if one wants to access a large set of investors. My regular day could be very different depending on what project I am working on. It could be, you know, if you are working with rating agencies that you work with them to figure out what kind of structure they want your securitization deal to have. There are multiple tranches to a deal -- how thick or how thin should one of the tranches be? What should be the process around that? Who are the investors that you think might be buying into those deals? So, it could range from analytics around that -- or, the other part is credit due diligence. A lot of investors who are investing into our loans -- they want to understand the process -- how does Lending Club originate loans? What is the process around it? How do we source borrowers? There's a lot of credit due diligence that goes into it. And then, what is the process around collecting money? What are we doing on the servicing side? I sometimes answer investor questions ranging from on credit to on securitization side. Or, they could be very broad-based, also -- like, what is happening in the macro markets. The trends in the macro market do impact the performance. And, our investors, since they are exposed to credit risk in the Lending Club loans, want us to monitor the risk on a very regular basis. If they see delinquincies go up or defaults increasing, they ask questions like: "What is happening?", "Why are portfolios deteriorating?", "Are you seeing similar trends across industry?", "What is happening to the traditional card lenders like Capital One and American Express?" It could range over a wide set of things based on what is the focus. In terms of the stress level, I would say it also varies. Sometimes, when there is a client deadline or clients are looking for insights into their portfolios, it gets stressful. You have to analyze the portfolio, you have to look into trends to understand drivers behind their performance. Or, it could be more long-term thinking. One of the projects that I am working on right now is about the following. When we sell these loans to investors, investors think of this as a very new asset class, so they have not really thought of them in a traditional sense -- what kind of diversification benefits does it provide to them? And given that loans are relatively illiquid, one cannot sell them, so Sharpe ratio econometric may not make sense. So, how does one incorporate risk and return of this asset class and try to explain it to an investor and how does one help them to think of it from a holistic perspective. Or, if there are more long-term projects, then obviously the stress level remains low. One can work on it at one's own pace. It varies quite a bit.

MC: I don't have a regular day-to-day right now. As I mentioned before, I feel like I'm working at a start-up. So, I'll start with the time when I actually had a day-to-day when I was at Twitter. At Twitter, I worked on advertising, meaning that I forecast our ads revenue and other ads-related metrics. So, it was a lot of time-series modeling and a lot of back-testing. To some extent, I feel it is similar to some of the things you do in finance. My day-to-day involves writing map-reduce to get data and making sure data is right and then importing it into our Python and building a model around back-test. So, it's a lot of modeling and back-testing, as well as trying to explain why back-test didn't go well and trying to explain your complex model to someone who does not have a statistical or quantitative background. In terms of stress level, it varies depending on when the earnings come out. My forecast also feeds the earnings report and sometimes we internally have a dotted line to our CFO. So, he's very straightforward. If he sends you an email at night, he basically expects you to reply in within an hour. So, I think the stress level comes from when people want quick responses and quick turnaround. Now, at Google, the day-to-day is very different. It really depends on what kind of product we are launching or what kind of experiments we are running. Again, I spend a lot of time trying to figure out where the data sits, because there are so many data sources at Google. There are so many people working on different things. You get -- I think at Google, I get around 100x more emails than I did at Twitter. So, a lot of times, you just kind of have to prioritize and sift for what is important to you. In terms of what I actually do -- I work on Google Photos. For now, my partners are product managers, engineers, as well as our machine intelligence team. So, my role is more like analyzing our user behavior data and trying to extract insight and communicate that with the product manager and eventually try to shape our product roadmap. The stress level sometimes depends on -- for example, last week, we were launching a new feature and it started with a 1% experiment. So, my role there is more like analyzing the experiment to see whether the differences between control and treatment make sense. That comes from traditional statistics -- you analyze what is significant and what is not and why a metric moves in different ways. It gets stressful when the engineers want to launch it to 100%, but you feel that the 1% experiment does not make much sense. So, you don't want to be a blocker when engineers want to ship things. And, you want to make sure that everything goes well on the back-end and the front-end and that we're okay to ship to 100%. On the other hand, I feel like the stress level also depends on how well you want to do your work. So, if you try hard enough in an environment like I am in right now, you really have the power to change what you are going to launch this product for. Because, I am one of three people in a team who are looking at data that other people on this product are not looking at. So, people are putting a lot of trust and responsibility on you for the purpose of making sure that you tell them what is going on with their product from a data perspective and what we should do going forward based on user habits and what users are doing on the product. I hope that makes sense. And if you are on iOS and don't use Google Photos, you really should. We can chat about that afterwards.

KC: My day starts at 6:50 every morning when my son gets ready for school and I have to decide if should I make him a peanut butter and jelly sandwich or ham and cheese. And that's extremely stressful if you make the wrong decision. But, back when I was running a hedge fund, my day was slightly different. Even when I was in charge of the firm, I liked to have responsibility for at least one portfolio. So, I was always trading a particular portfolio. Sometimes, it was the US, in which case you were up at 5:30. Other times, it was Europe, in which case you were up at 11:30 at night preparing a trade list. Asia is actually kind of the nicest, because you could prepare the trade list in the late afternoon. But, the process of trading at a quant fund -- because it's model-driven, you are not making the buy and sell decisions, but you are getting a model output and there, typically, for us, because our holding period was 9-12 months -- it was not a high-frequency trading strategy -- we would run a kind of sense check against the model just to make sure it wasn't driven by any rogue inputs. And then the main decision was really what's the execution strategy that's best suited to the particular trade. So, if it was an alpha-driven trade, one might choose a more aggressive execution strategy. If it was more risk-driven, one might choose a more passive one. So, there is an element of judgment involved in how to send the trades out to the market. So, that's part of the day as a  quant manager. Another part is going over attribution. So, we would have essentially a global dashboard that tracked factor performance in real time across all the geographies, all the sectors. We would split the world down into various categories. So, we spent a lot of time just trying to understand what was working and what wasn't. There were two purposes for that. Firstly, I was responsible for communicating to investors what was going on, so I needed to be on top of it. Secondly, one gets a lot of ideas for future research by studying real-time how the models are performing. Then, the beauty of quant management is that because the investment ideas aren't generated on the portfolio management desk, one has a lot of one's day, even me running the firm, for research. I ended up spending, I'd say, thirty to fifty percent of my time trying to generate new ideas or working with the research team helping them on their research. So, I'd say those three things constituted most of my day.

LO: I wouldn't say I have a typical day, per se. Although, the steps in the process do tend to be pretty similar and repeatable. And, to give you a sense of the timeline, we usually publish stuff two or three times a week. While we do work on some things for longer periods, typically between one and three days is the type of timeframe that we're dealing with when working on a particular report. So, I'd say we maintain a list of ideas that we think are of interest to investors and that we might want to publish on at some point in the near future. And those come from a variety of sources -- our own discussions on the team internally, conversations with clients, as well as things that are being discussed in the press or among competitors. So, when we're starting off on a particular report, we look through that list of ideas and determine which ones we think are most promising, most relevant, and of interest to our investor clients. Then, we'll try to identify what are the main questions that clients would like answers to. Then, we'll look at the available datasets and try to find some information that we can analyze for purpose of trying to answer those questions. Then, once we've gone through that process of running some numbers and we think we have something interesting to say, then the process of writing that up begins. And one wants to make sure -- there are elements of that that are similar to journalism where one wants a catchy headline that's going to attract attention. I think the market is overserved in research right now, so clients have a lot of noise coming at them all day. So, one wants to cut through that and make sure one is expressing one's ideas clearly and concisely, so that they can digest them in a reasonable amount of time and get on to their day jobs, as well. So, the writing process is pretty focused and another step in ensuring that one is communicating one's findings and one's ideas clearly. Then, we go through the process of actually publishing it. Research is highly regulated, so teams of compliance people and lawyers review everything that goes out. If they have any questions or they identify anything that they're uncomfortable with, then one needs to work with them to get a final version of the report that they're okay with and that can be sent out to clients. Once that happens, then the work of marketing the research begins. And that can be making phone calls, sending emails, planning events around a particular topic to make sure that the message gets out to clients, coordinating with the sales force and having them be part of the megaphone that delivers one's message to one's audience. Then, once that's over, we're back to square one again and one looks through one's list of ideas again and we're on to the next topic. One thing I would mention is -- for all the advantages of living on the west coast, one major disadvantage, working in the financial industry, depending on your perspective, is that one has to wake up early. So, stock market opens in New York at 6:30AM Pacific time. You've got to make sure that you are up to speed on any news that might have broken before that, on any requests that come in from clients. I would say, generally speaking, research is probably a little bit less stressful than other aspects of transactional finance. It's not like the phone is ringing off the hook with customers trying to put in orders all day. But, it's a little bit more of an academic type of culture within the research department. That being said, a lot of times news will break that one needs to react to and one needs to get some thoughts out. One needs to publish before one can speak with any clients. Sometimes, you are under tight deadlines there and it's not uncommon for one to have other things, i.e. requests that come in, so one needs to multitask at times. There can be time-sensitive aspects to the work. But, generally speaking, working in a research department versus working on a trading floor tends to be less stressful.

MR: It's kind of a cliched answer. But, I'm not sure I have a typical day. It varies depending on where one is in the lifecycle of a project. Working at a small firm, one has to wear a lot of different hats from beginning to end of the research process. A fair amount of one's time could be spent working on coming up with new set of features that you think might be interesting for giving one new forecasts that aren't captured in one's existing model. So, what data does one need to construct that feature, how does one go about sourcing it, how dirty and poorly formatted does it end up being, and how does one have to clean it to do something meaningful with it. Then, there's the data science research part of asking what kind of predictions can we build using this data. What impact do they have on a strategy that one may be trading. If one knew this information historically, what would one's back-tests look like. Then, writing code to implement that in production and put those changes into the trading system. That process, depending on where one is in the lifecycle of a project like that can lead a day to look very different. But, a commonality for us is that we're founded by people who have software backgrounds. I think my boss wrote the first recommender system at Amazon, way back in the day. So, we are organized very much like a software engineering firm. We follow an agile development process. We plan out work on two-week cycles. So, there are certain things that one is committed to doing over a two-week period and those deadlines matter. Other people are counting on oneself to have some piece of work done so that they can start on their piece of work. I'd say there's not people screaming and smashing phones -- the kinds of cliches of being on a trading floor in the old days of Wall Street. But, there is an expectation -- assuming one is in a small firm, everyone is depending on oneself to get one's piece of the work done. And, when deadlines come around, there can be a little bit of a push. But, it's pretty manageable and it can be a lot of fun at the same time.

EV: In terms of the -- the hardest thing is starting early. Typically, I start at 5:30AM and I finish around 6PM or 7PM. The slightly tricky part is the assets my group trades are fairly complex assets and are very levered and require a lot of time to trade them at the right price with the right people for the transaction. This means that as a researcher, I need to be involved in the portfolio management and the trading process. And, my portfolio managers and traders need to be involved in the research process. So, it ends up with I start with traders to be able to assist where they need it. Then, they are going to finish close to where I finish to be able to send back some ideas. From that standpoint, I have a routine. The content itself during the day I would say depends mostly on two aspects. There is the aspect of other priorities from an investment standpoint. For example, "Is the portfolio performing well or not?" If it's performing well, then I can focus more on what will be longer-term research projects. If the portfolio is losing money, then that means my ideas stink. So, I need to kill it and fix it. This means that I will not sleep until it is done and it is more going to be short-term work. So, there are definitely some fluctuations there. One aspect I would think can be stressful is even though we are quants and we are supposed to have mathematical models and we are in control because we back-test. Well, that's true when one is right. When one is right, one likes their model. Then, when one starts to lose money a little bit, one is going to be fine. When one starts to lose a lot of money, which we all hope does not happen and that sometimes happens, then one starts to panic, because ultimately one is still human. That's probably where the stress happens. So, to give you an example, when I started trading -- so that was a few years ago -- not too far back, but still -- I remember my boss back then gives me a budget and says, "Watch out for loss, because you're going to get scared." I remember one day I lost $30,000 and I was really worried -- I was like, "Holy [heck], he's going to be really mad." And he was like, "What do you mean, you lost money -- it's only $30,000 -- you're not taking enough risk." It's a matter of -- one relativizes what is stressful and meaningful versus what is not. Now, if one is as forward, we do manage much bigger budgets, but there are days that are pretty stressful. The most recent was, for instance, Brexit -- when the UK voted to leave the European Union. That day, I started at 5:30AM like everyday, I watched through the Brexit vote and market reaction until 6AM of the subsequent day. I slept for thirty minutes and went back to work. That was stressful, because I was exhausted. It's not so much that one is losing money, but that one is entering a market that one does not know how things are going to react in. One is investing a lot of money on behalf of clients, so one needs to know what one is doing and whether things are under control. That's the kind of stress that can show up regardless of whether one has a quant project or not. Eventually, one is in the business of making money. The research itself I would say is the least stressful part of the process in that one is trying to create knowledge and resolve problems that were not necessarily resolved before or that were not resolved adequately or to one's satisfaction before. So there, I would not say it is so much stress as much as the ability to sort through what one is actually trying to answer and knowing when to stop because it is not going to be promising. One is not going to spend ten years trying to resolve a model and ten years later one has not produced anything concrete. If at some point, one realizes that it is not promising, one needs to stop. That was investment into research time -- it's a dead-end, that's it. And being able to prioritize. If there is a really cool thing that one is working on and one is like, "That's awesome!" and one is going to spend ten hours a day for the next two years on it and someone's like, "I need your help on something that is important now," being able to quickly shift between those two priorities on one's mind is something that is not really a form of stress, but it's a form of intellectual habit -- being able to do that and being good on the two parts, because exigencies exist on the two aspects.

KC: Andrew, can I -- just listening to these comments on stress, I wanted to mention a thing that popped up in my mind which is that when one is managing a portfolio that is levered, then there is an element of stress that arises because at some point, things are out of one's control. If one is running a model, the nice thing about a model-based portfolio is that it strips the emotion out of the buy and sell decision. So, one works on the model and one has confidence in it. In most conditions, one sticks with it. But, if one is running a levered portfolio and one loses money, then the ability to stick with the model is no longer totally one's decision. It can be the decision of the people who've lent one the money, who say, "We no longer believe in you and we're forcing you to cut back," and they typically do that at just the wrong time. So, I think the stress level is non-linear in that sense and that's important to keep in mind when thinking about what jobs one is suited to. In addition, when one is running a levered portfolio, one also has counterparty risk as well, and so there is an additional worry of, "Well, do I think the guy who is holding my cash who is on the other side of my derivative transaction -- is he going to be credit-worthy?" So, the ability to stick to one's model when one moves out of the long-only world into the levered hedge fund world is not 100% and that introduces a level of stress that is hard to model in some sense but that can spike dramatically.

Moderator: Yeah, making money is very stress-free and as soon as one starts losing it it becomes immensely stressful. I'll just open these questions to whoever wants to answer and we don't need to go down the line all night. What makes a good quant? What kind of skills are valuable and what mix of skills are valuable? What attributes in a personality are good for quantitative finance?

EV: I'll provide some feedback on that based on my experience. I think what makes a -- first of all, I think it depends on what job the quant is doing -- in my line of work, I think good quants are people who are able to think clearly, think rigorously, and think on their own. We don't want to be distorted by one's priorities, we don't want to be distorted by what others have done or have said that one should find. And, one needs to be able to build up one's own thinking process to get to the answer that one is looking for. In terms of personality, etc, I am not sure there is a clear answer. I have a lot of colleagues who are researchers and they are all fairly different from one other. And the main commonality is that they are all pretty good at thinking about how to get real expertise trying to answer questions. One thing maybe that does stand out is that if one were to do some form of personality test and tried to look at how people think about typical situations in their daily life, I think a lot of researchers would tend to be a little more remote from feelings and from personal engagement in such a situation versus others to the point where a lot of my colleagues can tell that I am pretty weird and asocial from that standpoint. So, I would say it's maybe almost -- it's not necessarily that one is like that and that's why one is good at research -- I think there is a feedback where one gets used to thinking about everything objectively and so every situation that one faces starts being treated under that angle because it shapes one's approach process.

MR: There is an element to -- I think quants are people who have this kind of innate self-starter type of personality and intellectual curiosity. They kind of go, "That's interesting, I wonder if anyone's ever looked at that," and they kind of dig around. Someone -- the kind of person who's willing to take a problem that may not be so well-defined and go, "Huh -- that's kind of curious -- I wonder if we've looked at this kind of data or if we've looked at the problem in this way." Also, they're the kind of person that has the initiative to go, "How do I dig into that? There's noone to tell me where to find this data, so I'm going to have to start looking on my own. I may not have some nice tool to get the data that I want, so I may have to start -- what do I have to teach myself to do or what kind of research do I have to do to even figure out how to get the data to do the research I want to do?" And so, that kind of intellectual curiosity coupled with this willingness to roll up sleeves and wade into a messy data science problem is hard to teach sometimes. I think that one finds some quants that have that "let's dive in into the uncertainty and start trying to resolve the uncertainty and make progress" attitude. You may have an absolutely great academic background, but in classes, one kind of knows what one needs to do for the homework to get to the final answer. One has got to be comfortable with -- one does not know if there will be a final answer -- so, one has to take some risk of, "Okay, I'm going to invest time in exploring this." There's no syllabus, so maybe I need to -- maybe there's some paper that I need to go find and read and maybe that'll spark an idea that noone else has looked at -- and one has got to be willing to deal with that ambiguity and uncertainty and still jump in and start making progress in the face of it. That's a quality that I see across a lot of quants who have been very successful.

MC: I could not agree with you more, so I have to say something. So, I think -- from my experience -- at Twitter, I never learned how to write a map-reduce job in any of my training. When it comes to -- Twitter uses Scala framework? I don't even know Java. So, how do I even get data? So, I think what's important is that I taught myself Scala and I tried to learn Scala in order to run map-reduce in order to get the data that I needed. And I think a habit for a data scientist is that one has the data that one needs instead of not knowing where it lives or not knowing what tool to use to get the data. Similar things happened at Google. When I started, we had a data engineer team that did the data pipeline, but often times the data that I needed did not exist in the pipeline. So, what would one do? One can file a ticket and wait for the data engineers to get data for oneself, which would take around a week, or one can teach oneself Golang, which is the map-reduce language we use at Google. And, so one can go in there, add data to the pipeline, change the production code, submit a change list, and then one will have the data that one needs. Going forward, one does not have to rely on other people to get things for oneself. So, I think that type of thing, to me, is extremely valuable. Again, like Mike's point, it is important to be proactive and to think about, "I wonder, what if I look at this? I wonder how those people get the data I need? Why has noone else ever looked at this?" So, thinking outside of the box and keeping that curiosity is very important for what I do right now.

Moderator: One question touching on the skills aspect is -- data science is a hot area, especially here in San Francisco and the Bay Area -- how are you all seeing opportunities change for people with data science skills both within finance and outside of finance? How is that changing the industry and changing the opportunities for people with your skillsets?

RA: I can take that. I can speak from my experience. I was at Goldman for about six years and I initially started doing some derivative structuring, because the market for derivatives -- it was not hot, I would say, as pre-crisis it was starting to coming down -- but some of the regulations were not impacting it as much. But, over the five or six years, I've seen people worrying less and less about derivatives, because markets and products became simpler. And the need for data scientists or for people with data science skillsets started to pick up. And one of the primary reasons was availability of data. So, in investment banking, where one's goal is much more sales-like, where one is talking to clients about any M&A transaction or raising money through debt or equity -- it's a very relationship-driven business. But, I saw Goldman going towards a more data-oriented approach, because a lot more data was available. There were different tools that popped up -- it's not just Excel anymore. One has Tableau and other fancy analytics suites which one can use by plugging in data and trying to derive trends. Then, one can advise one's clients using those techniques. So, it's the availability of data that has gotten people to start to look at it differently. I feel that the firms that are not using data to their advantage feel left out or their clients feel that they are not providing adequate insights. That is one of the different -- I have seen here at Lending Club, also -- the whole model is set up around data, because there is so much data available from consumers that one can build a model and assess risk and compete with banks like Chase or Citi or Bank of America, who have been in the consumer lending business for hundreds and hundreds of years. So, because there is so much data that is available out there -- the depth and the quality of data is increasing because of digitization all around the world -- it helps firms doing all sorts of businesses -- not just finance, if one looks around -- Google, Facebook, and Amazon building recommendation systems providing insights to users based on their different patterns. So, I think it has penetrated almost every aspect.

MR: I may be biased in that I work for a firm that was intentionally founded at the intersection of finance and data science. But, as someone who has been in on the buy-side of quant investing for over a decade, there is a profound shift that is happening. I am the only person with a financial economics background at Voleon. I am sort of the weird oddball they hired. I am a bit off the beaten path from their perspective. I'd say my background is very typical for the types of people who went into quant investing a decade ago. If one looks at the press for the quant industry, there are lots of firms that are either establishing data science groups as part of their existing quant research or they're firms that are founding entire hedge funds based on this idea of applying machine learning and data science to investing. So, it's become increasingly an area of focus and attention both on the quant research side as well as on the client side. I think that trend is only going to continue. I think one of the interesting things to see when -- when I moved out to the Bay Area in 2005 to join BGI, I had personal reasons for wanting to be on the west coast and I was really happy and excited about BGI, but also -- there just weren't that many firms that were going to let me do quant research sitting out in the bay. Fast forward ten years, and there's been -- partially driven by this interest in data science -- a lot of firms have started to establish research groups, because there is such a data-science-oriented talent pool out here. I think that the opportunities to practice this craft and not have to move to the east coast have never been better. And I think that there's a growing community of data-science-oriented quant finance that's out here and that things were not like that here earlier in my career and I think that's exciting to see.

KC: Can I add something to that?

Moderator: Yeah.

KC: In some ways it's new and in some ways it's not, in the sense that we used to say that there is a "return to boredom". And what we meant was that the time one spent taking unstructured data and putting it together into a useful dataset was often the most valuable time one spent. So, collecting unstructured data, interrogating it, cleaning it, and then putting it into some sort of structure -- while that was boring and in the old days it had to be kind of almost done by hand -- that's where one really had an edge. So, I've always been a believer in the value of unstructured data. And now, I think, one has tools to do that over a vastly greater potential set of data. So, I really am enthusiastic about the opportunities for machine learning. It's not a skillset that I have, but I know it's a skillset that a lot of you guys have. And, I feel -- just to echo what was just said -- that there is going to be a lot of opportunity to apply that in finance down the road.

Moderator: Great. So, I think now might be a good time to open it up to audience questions. So, there's a mic here, if anyone wants to come forward and ask a question for any of our panelists.

A1: Hi, my name is Lev. I am earning my master's degree in statistics here at Berkeley. I'm getting really interested in, as a lot of you guys said, applying statistical and machine learning ideas to finance, but I don't have any sort of career background working in finance. So, I wanted to ask how could someone like me, after graduation, start getting his foot in the door, so to speak?

MR: You know, I think this is typical for a lot of firms that work in quant approaches to trading. Teaching someone who has a lot of finance industry knowledge how to think quantitatively and how to think about data science and how to think about financial theory is a lot harder than to take someone who has that base of skillsets and to teach them market knowledge about the dynamics of corporate bonds or equities. So, I think the skillset that you're building and acquiring is the one that's harder to come by. And every firm I've been with has had some way to train one up on the more institutional market knowledge side of things. So, I think that you're on the right path.

LO: Just a few practical suggestions if you want to get some experience. The CFA curriculum is a great resource. It's sort of self-study-based. It's not terribly expensive to get into, although they do charge a fee to maintain your designation, once you've received it. So, that's one thing to look into. Also, trading either real money or a paper portfolio on your own to get some experience in finance and the applications of your skillset to the industry. And, there are also a few things -- some start-ups and things like that -- that actually will provide you with some pretty robust tools in order to develop trading strategies. And these companies may actually implement them. They raise funds behind that and they might actually decide to implement some strategies you've developed and put real money behind them. So, I'd say there are a lot of ways. And of course, an internship would be another way to get your hands dirty and to see if you really like working in finance before you have to commit to a full-time job.

Moderator: I think that you often don't need a lot of finance experience to get your foot in the door and ge that first step. But, you need to demonstrate that you care enough to do something. So, like what Louis was saying, CFA is a great way -- taking even just level one is a great way to say, "Yes, I'm interested in finance and I'm not an idiot." And then, you have the technical skills. Because, at the end of the day, the technical skills are what really matter, but you do need to demonstrate that you're not just a scientist who doesn't know anything about markets. Maybe we'll take the next question?

A2: Hi. In a bit of a different vein, I have a question about work-life balance. It sounds like you all have worked across the spectrum in finance and in more data-science-oriented roles. Which roles or firms do you think have the most in-office-required time, which roles might resemble more of a portfolio management or out-of-office/remote kind, and which roles might resemble more of a standard technical job in terms of culture and work-life balance.

Moderator: In my personal experience as a researcher, I find that the more one is buried in research and less looking at daily portfolio, that opens itself for more time away from the office, for example. I work at an office in downtown San Francisco, but I've worked for months at a time remotely in Asia. My job could very easily be taken to a lot of other places, because in my situation, I do a bunch of research, I build a strategy, and ultimately it goes into an index that a portfolio tracks. So, all the rules and all the logic -- everything is already embedded in the documentation. So, most of what I'm researching all day long is learning about what's going on in the portfolio, but also coming up with new ideas for new portfolios -- things like that. So, my time at the office -- I'm there, but I really wouldn't have to be.

EV: I'm going to have to beat you on that. I would say the work-life balance, to a decent extent, is what you want to make it. I think it's very easy to get caught into feeling very stressed out or feeling that you never put enough hours in because you have so much to learn or so much you don't understand that you may spend your entire day or your entire night doing that. At some point, it's a personal choice. Some people won't -- some people really don't like to do it. I think in the quant business, you have more control over that. And you have naturally a better work-life balance than what you could find in a fundamental shop, because the person who is right is not the person who is oldest or loudest. It's the person who can actually come up with a good idea and prove it. So, effectively, once you've proven your idea, your idea is proven -- right? You don't need to stay an extra four hours to keep explaining over someone else's voice why you have a better trade. So, I would say you would be a bit more in control. The flexibility of working on-site versus from your home remotely or from whereever you want probably depends on your exact role and also on the type of business you are in. So, if you are responsible for putting orders, there is very little chance that they will let you do it remotely. There are regulatory requirements on how you can actually place orders and where from. But, there is also constraint of -- other people who are around that process will want to be near you if there is an issue or question. If your process is fully automated, even there you may still have necessity to be in the office more often, because you are still responsible for the actual execution. But, I can give you examples. Effectively, when you do pure research, you tend to have better ideas or have higher productivity in terms of original creativity when you are remote, instead of just looking at your portfolio everyday. So, typically, what I do when I work on very-uncertain-outcome research -- I don't know if it is going to lead to something or not -- I tend to work from home. Noone bothers me and noone can talk to me. And I'm going to do that for two weeks, three weeks, four weeks. As long as people around are fine, meaning they know I am still going to get my job done, then it's okay on both sides. But, there is always a matter of what you want and what's good for you and what people working with you need from you, as well.

MC: Really quickly, I think that with data science in tech, the general culture, at least at Google, was in the team meetings. No one really cares how long you work, or when you show up at work, or when you leave, as long as you show up in the meetings that you are supposed to be at and as long as you get your work done. So, that's how I feel, if that helps.

Moderator: Great, so I think probably we only have time for the next three questions. And then, I think we'll just open it up and we can casually have conversation and meet and whatnot.

A3: Thank you. My name is Jason. I am currently a master's student in financial engineering program at USC. So, firstly, thank you guys for being here and sharing good stories with us. My question is similar to the first one -- do you guys have any other suggestions for specifically PhD students from another area such as, maybe, electrical engineering who are also interested in quantitative finance. Do you find any advantages or disadvantages for those PhD students?

MR: I think it's very firm-dependent. I think the types of backgrounds that I recruited for in previous firms I worked for tended to be more aligned with people who are trained in, say, economics or financial economics or accounting. We wouldn't have had as much demand on the engineering side. At the firm that I work for now -- Voleon -- I think a huge proportion of our recruiting happens at NIPS, at ICML, at these kind of big machine-learning/data-science conferences where academics go to present their work. When you're there, you see that there are a lot of other quant firms that are recruiting at the same places. In terms of PhD or no PhD, or what background in PhD -- different firms are going to have their own flavor and their own take on what it is they're looking for, but you can see some of those firms have a common interest that maybe helps focus where you're trying to get your foot in the door.

A3: Alright, thank you.

A4: Hi, my name is Josiah. I am a grad student in the stats department. My question is about work-life balance and it has multiple parts. How many times last week have you had dinner with your family? What time was dinner served? Did you work after dinner?

EV: The sample size is too small to be statistically significant.

MR: I think just about every night last week I had dinner with my wife. We tend to eat dinner late, because I have a long commute. So, when I get home, my kids have already eaten and gone off to swim or soccer, or whatever the activity of the day is. So, once the kids are down, then my wife and I make dinner. I would say after dinner there are two or three times where I might be going and checking email, responding to someone's code review comments. But, I still get a reasonable functioning night's sleep.

KC: You need to take control of your own circumstances. So -- every firm has its own culture. Some firms will want you to be home having dinner with your wife and see your kids, because they think that makes you a better worker. Others want you to work or be available 24 hours a day. So, you just have to make that part of your criteria and, like I said, take control. You may have to sift through different opportunities to find something that fits what you want. So, I would say have a firm idea of what you want and then I think you can find it, but it will take some work. And I think you learn a lot about the values of a firm by asking this sort of -- maybe not exactly in that specific way -- trying to get that information out of them when you interview.

Moderator: Yeah, I would say on the west coast, your chance of eating dinner with your family is a lot higher than on the east coast. So, I will never see my wife in the morning, because I start work for market hours, but I do finish in time for dinner and that's great.

A4: Thank you.

Moderator: Alright, well, I'd like to thank all the panelists and thank you everyone for coming.

--


